🧾 WITNESS STATEMENT – ADA HAMILTON
Pages 001–009 of 9
Taken on oath, 9 August 1883 (resworn 11 August 1883)

PAGE 001
The Information of Ada Hamilton, the wife of William Hamilton,
of 8 Courtenay Place, St. James Street, Walthamstow, in the said County,
taken on oath before me, the undersigned,
one of Her Majesty's Justices of the Peace, acting in and for the said County,
this ninth day of August, 1883, who saith as follows:

I am a monthly nurse. I know the prisoner William Gouldstone.
I have been acting as nurse to his wife who was confined on Wednesday the 1st of August of twins — two male children.
I have been residing in the house for the past ten weeks.
There were three other children:
— Charles Gouldstone, three years and a half old
— Herbert Gouldstone, two years and a half old
— and Frederick Gouldstone, sixteen months old.
Last night, Wednesday the 8th of August instant, between 5 and 6 o'clock, I was in the prisoner's...

PAGE 002
...bedroom with his wife. I was washing the two babies.
About a quarter past 5 o'clock I heard that the prisoner had come home.
I heard him go into the kitchen.
Two of the eldest children were at the time in the kitchen playing, and Frederick was in the bedroom with me.
I went into the kitchen.
When the prisoner came in and seeing him in the kitchen I said,
“Oh, you did frighten me. I wondered who it was.”
He did not answer me.
I went back into the bedroom to finish washing the babies.
When he came in about 10 minutes afterwards he stood by his wife’s side.
She was in bed.
She asked him how it was he was home so early.
He said, “I left my situation...”

PAGE 003
...the manager went to dinner and [I] came home.”
His wife said, “Did you tell them at the shop about my being confined?”
He replied, “No.”
He then, without further speaking, took the little boy Frederick off the bed and carried him into the kitchen.
When I had finished washing the first infant I went into the kitchen, leaving the two babies by their mother’s side.
On going into the kitchen the prisoner was sitting on the fire guard and the children were playing on the floor.
He had a piece of string, similar to that produced, in his fingers.
I asked him if he had had his tea — he replied, “No.”
I told him his tea was ready for him, and I went back into the bedroom and washed the other...

PAGE 004
...baby.
I left both infants again by their mother’s side and returned to the kitchen.
The three children were still playing.
I went into the wash house and saw the prisoner still sitting on the fire guard.
I noticed a chair placed under the cistern.
I noticed that the perambulator had been shifted.
I asked him who placed the chair there, and one of the children, Charlie, replied, “Dad did it.”
I went back into the bedroom and got the prisoner's wife out of bed and I re-made her bed.
She got in again.
Just as she was getting in again the prisoner came along the passage.
He looked in the room.
I told him he could come in.
He mumbled something and went back to the kitchen.
I suggested to Mrs Gouldstone that...

PAGE 005
...I should leave the room to give the prisoner an opportunity, if he desired, of speaking to her privately.
I went downstairs.
I heard the prisoner open the kitchen door and later heard him go into the bedroom I had just left.
I went to the yard door and heard screams of “Murder!” from the prisoner’s wife.
I ran upstairs and tried to open the bedroom door.
I found it was locked from the inside.
I heard Mrs Gouldstone crying out, “He is murdering my children!”
I cried, “Help! Help!”
The landlady of the house where the prisoner lodges was in the yard at the time — she ran to me and we both tried to force the door open.
We could not and we called to the...

PAGE 006
...prisoner to open the door.
He did so.
I said to him, “Oh, you wicked man, what have you done?”
He said, “I have killed the children. I am a happy man now.”
He said to his wife, “Your other three children are in the cistern.”
I went to the wife's side and saw both babies bleeding from their mouths.
One of the children had a bruise over its eye.
Neither of them were dead then, but both appeared to be dying.
I sent for a doctor.
Prisoner went into the kitchen.
I stopped with the prisoner's wife a few seconds.
I went then into the kitchen and saw the prisoner with the child Frederick in his arms.
He laid the child on the ground.
It appeared to be dead.
I was very frightened and found the prisoner's...

PAGE 007
...wife out on the landing.
I ran to her and didn’t leave her for ten minutes.
When I went into the kitchen again I saw all three children lying all in a row on the ground.
They were all dead.
They all appeared to have been drowned.
A gentleman was present — a [illegible].
The prisoner was present.
I didn’t hear him say anything.
A police officer came and he took the prisoner into custody.
Both infants are now dead.
When taken away by the police he said,
“All the children are dead now, I shall be hanged and you will be single — you wished them dead and now they are.”
He kissed his wife and said, “Goodbye.”
The prisoner always appeared...

PAGE 008
...happy with his temper.
I noticed that he appeared strange after the twins were born.
He always appeared fond of his children.
After the prisoner had left the bedroom and the police had arrived,
I found the hammer produced on the floor in the bedroom by the side of the dressing table.
I handed it to one of the constables present.

Sworn this 9th August 1883
[signed] Ada Hamilton
[signed] Arthur Lister

Resworn this eleventh day of August 1883
[signed] W.H. Poynter