Henry Gould sworn
I reside at Leyton, am a [crossed out word] Member of the College of Surgeons, London, I am Divisional Surgeon of Police for Leyton. About 6 o'clock on the 8th instant I was called by Inspector Folkard I went with him to Number 8 Courtenay Place. I went into the front room on the first floor. There I saw in a bed two male children only a few days old. I examined them and found they had both received injuries to the head. Both their skulls were fractured and blood and froth was issuing from the mouth of one of them. They were living but not possible to live. I went then into the kitchen. I there saw three children lying on the floor side by side. They were quite dead and the clothes of two were saturated with water. One was naked. I saw no marks of violence on two of them but on the throat of the eldest of the three Charles I found an indentation mark probably caused by a piece of string.
Shortly after 8 o'clock the same evening I went again to the house and found that one of the two younger children had died. Early the next morning I found that the other child was dead. Since then I have made post mortem examinations of the whole of the five children. As to the two younger children I found that death had been caused by violence used to them both. As to the three other children, from the condition of their heads and lungs, I found they had died from suffocation caused by drowning. All the bodies of the children were well nourished.
Cross-examined:
I have seen prisoner several times.
Signed:
Henry Gould
Sworn this 18th August 1883
Nath. Powell

[Note at the foot of the page, in ink, another hand:] Commit[ted] for Trial Next Sess[ions] Cen. Crim. C[ourt]. / Insp. Craggs bound over to prosecute

[CORRECTED 30 September 2026 against images 0023 and 0024: "not possible to save" read "not possible to live" (image 0023; found in a parallel session and confirmed here). The clerk's phrase compresses what the press reports of the same hearing give as "I saw it was impossible that they could live" (Times, 20 August) and "I thought it impossible that the children could live" (IPN, 25 August).
 "the eldest, Charles" read "the eldest of the three Charles"; "of the eldest of the five children" read "of the whole of the five children"; the foot note was omitted. On the cross-examination line: The Times and the IPN, independent reports of the same hearing, both give Gould's answer as "I have only seen the prisoner in connexion with this case". The clerk's "several times" is very likely a compression of that answer and is not evidence of any earlier medical contact with William. The press reports also show that Atkinson then tried to question Gould on insanity from the "Cyclopaedia of Practical Medicine" and the Bench refused it; none of that is in this deposition.]
