Source image: Daily_Telegraph_10_Aug_1883.jpg
Newspaper/title if visible: Not visible in image
Date if visible: Not visible in image
Page/column/article if known: Article titled “THE TRAGEDY AT WALTHAMSTOW.”
Transcription scope: The visible article headed “THE TRAGEDY AT WALTHAMSTOW.”
Transcription status: Complete

TRANSCRIPTION

THE TRAGEDY AT WALTHAMSTOW.

William Gouldstone's fifth child died early yesterday morning from injuries inflicted upon it by its father. The whole family, therefore, has been killed.
At the Court House of the Half Hundred of Beacontree Division at Stratford, yesterday, Mr. Arthur Lister, J.P., and Mr. W. W. Glenny on the bench, William Gouldstone, twenty-six, described as a blacksmith, living at No. 8, Courtney-place, St. James's-street, Walthamstow, was brought up in custody of Inspectors Raggo and Foulkard, of the V Division, charged with murdering his three children—Charles, aged three years and a half, Herbert, two years and a half, and Frederick, aged sixteen months—by putting them into a water cistern at his residence, 8, Courtney-place, on the 8th instant; also with murdering his two male infant children, seven days old, by striking them on the head with a hammer at the same time and place. The prisoner is a fair man, with light-coloured hair and moustache, and is of medium height. During the whole of the case he remained apparently quite calm and collected, though he seemed careworn and restless. When he was first placed in the dock he looked round the court; then, folding his arms, he rested them on the top of the dock, and gazed anxiously at the magistrates on the bench. At times he listened attentively to the evidence which was given against him, and now and then smiled when certain actions of his were described by the witness.—Mr. John W. Atkinson, solicitor, of Stratford, appeared on Gouldstone's behalf.
Mrs. Ada Hamilton, wife of William Hamilton, residing in the same house as the prisoner, said: I am a monthly nurse and know the prisoner. I have been acting as nurse to his wife, who was confined on Aug. 1 of twins, both male children. I have been residing in the house as a lodger for the last ten weeks. There were three other children in the family—Charles, Herbert, and Frederick. Last night between five and six o'clock I was in Mrs. Gouldstone's bed-room washing the two babies. While doing so the prisoner came in from the street. I heard him go into the kitchen where the two eldest children were playing. Freddy was in the bed-room with me and his mother. When I heard the prisoner come in I went to the kitchen just to see who it was, and I said to him, “Oh, you did frighten me, I wondered who it was.” He made no reply. I did not notice anything particular about him. I went back into the bed-room and finished washing the baby, when he came into the room. This was ten minutes after he came indoors. He stood by his wife's bedside, but did not speak to her. She said to him, “How is it you are home so early?” and he replied, “I left the place while the manager had gone to dinner, and I came home.” His wife then asked him if he had told them at the shop about her confinement, and he answered “No.” With that he took the little boy Frederick off the bed and into the kitchen. [Here the witness commenced to sob, and she seemed much affected all the subsequent time she was in the witness-box.] When I had finished washing the first infant I went into the kitchen after I had put the babe by its mother's side. I saw the prisoner sitting on the fireguard, the three children playing on the floor. He had a piece of string in his hand. I asked the prisoner if he had had his tea, and he said “No.” I then told him it was ready for him, and with that went back into the bed-room, and washed the other baby. Having done so, I put it into the bed by the side of the mother, and then returned to the kitchen. I passed into the washhouse beyond, and saw a chair by the cistern. The children were at this time still playing in the kitchen. The cistern was in the washhouse, up high. The prisoner was sitting on the fireguard in the kitchen. A perambulator had stood there, but it had been moved out a bit. I asked who had put it there, and the little boy Charlie said, “Daddy did.” I took the chair back into the kitchen, and then returned to the bed-room and got Mrs. Gouldstone out of her bed. I re-made the bed, and she got into it again. Just at this time, as she was getting into bed, the prisoner came along the passage and looked into the room. I said, “You can come in, Mr. Gouldstone.” He made some answer in a mumbling tone, which I could not hear. With that I said to Mrs. Gouldstone, “Shall I leave the room a minute? Perhaps Mr. Gouldstone wants to speak to you,” and she answered, “Yes, do, my dear.” With that I left the room and went downstairs. I heard the prisoner open the kitchen door, which was shut as I passed it, walk across the landing and into the bed-room. I got to the yard door when I heard screams of “Murder!” from the prisoner's wife. I ran upstairs, and tried to open the door, she still crying “Murder!” inside. I could hear no one speak but her. I heard her saying, “Good God! he is murdering my children.” I did not hear the cries of the children. Being unable to open the door, I leaned over the banisters and called out “Help!” three or four times. The landlady of the house, whom I had seen in the yard when I was there, ran towards me. We both pushed the door to try to force it open, but could not do so. The prisoner opened the door himself. I had called out to him, “Open the door.” His wife was still crying out. When he opened the door I said, “Oh, you wicked man, what have you done?” He said, “I have killed my children. I am a happy man now. Your other three children are in the cistern.” He was then speaking to his wife. I then went to his wife's side and saw both babies bleeding from the mouth. There were marks of violence on them. One of the children had a bruise over one of its eyes. I examined the children, and finding they were not dead I at once sent for a medical man. They appeared to be dying. The accused went into the kitchen and I stopped with his wife for a few seconds. Mrs. Gouldstone said to me, “He says he has killed the other three children, go and see, will you?” I went into the kitchen and saw the prisoner coming in the kitchen door from the washhouse with the body of the boy Frederick in his arms, and he laid it on the floor. It was wet. I turned back, and seeing Mrs. Gouldstone coming out of her room along the landing I ran back to her as I did not want her to see the child. It seemed as if it had been in the water and appeared to be dead. I was very much frightened. I went back to the mother, and I did not leave her for ten minutes. When I went into the kitchen again I saw the three children lying on the ground with a gentleman (a chemist) leaning over them. They were all in a row—side by side. They were swamped with water. He said nothing, and no one spoke to him. I saw a police-constable come afterwards, and saw the accused taken into custody. Prisoner and the policeman went into the bed-room, and his wife asked him to leave all the money he had as she had the doctor to pay. Both the infant children are now dead. One died half an hour after the prisoner was taken away, and the other at about two o'clock that morning. While in the room with his wife the prisoner said, “All the children are dead now; I shall be hanged and you will be single. You wished them dead, and now they are.” He then kissed his wife. I have lived in the house for ten weeks, and know that the prisoner has always lived on good terms with his wife; but I noticed he appeared strange after the twins were born. He was not unkind to the children, he seemed fond of them all, but he had not looked at the twins. His wife was now dangerously ill in bed.

Inspector Craggs at this point asked for an adjournment.

Mr. Atkinson: I should like to ask a few questions, with your permission.

Mr. Lister: Do you really think your case will be improved by cross-examining now? Don't you think it would be better to reserve it?

Mr. Atkinson: I leave it entirely in your hands.

Mr. Lister: Then the prisoner will be remanded till Saturday, and in the meantime further inquiries will be made.

The prisoner was then removed from the dock.

EDITORIAL NOTES

The newspaper title and date are not visible in the supplied image; the source filename indicates Daily_Telegraph_10_Aug_1883.jpg. The transcription follows the article's continuous reading order and does not preserve individual newspaper line breaks.
