Criminal annals supply few stories equalling in atrocity the tale of how WILLIAM GOULDSTONE, yesterday found guilty and sentenced to be hanged, barbarously murdered his five innocent children at Walthamstow. Fortunately for our belief in human nature, a monster of this description only rarely emerges above the horizon of existence, to horrify ordinary human beings with a deed of awful pitilessness. For a monster WILLIAM GOULDSTONE is, whatever was the state of mind in which he executed his atrocious purpose, and whether he be responsible for his actions or not. The sole question in regard to such a crime must beÐwas the man mad who did it? If, as in the present case, there is an absence of all reasonable motive which could in any way explain the appalling act, then the presumption of insanity becomes terribly strong. Everybody would believe almost instinctively that the father who drowns three children, and dashes the heads of two others against the floor till they die, must be either a perfect miracle of baseness and iniquity, or else a being morally unaccountable for what he does.In the case of WILLIAM GOULDSTONE, the public, horrified and shocked as it has been by the published details of one of the most heartless series of assassinations of which we have any record, is placed in a position of difficulty in judging the man. That he was not a bad character; that up to the date of the crime he had borne himself as a quiet, well-disposed workman, was proved yesterday at the trial; and, if we reject this theory of frightful moral turpitude, then there seems nothing to fall back upon but the idea that the man was insane, a notion which the jury by their verdict have certainly not encouraged. Awful as the fivefold murder was, it is a paramount duty not to allow the natural detestation of the crime to prejudice our minds in considering the mental and moral state of the man who committed it. Unfortunately, the law is not very clear as to what particular condition of mind constitutes insanity so as to render a man not legally punishable for murder. The ambiguity of the law follows the uncertainty of medical science, because there is no doubt that a lamentable difference of opinion exists among our foremost scientific doctors on the boundaries which separate mental health from mental disease.Mr. Justice DAY told the jury in the Walthamstow murder case that the sole question they had to determine was whether, at the time when WILLIAM GOULDSTONE killed his children, he knew the nature and quality of the act which he committed. The condemnatory verdict of the jury was only a natural outcome of such a judicial direction; but, whatever the law may be on the subject, ordinary common sense tells us that a man may be a raving maniac, and yet know perfectly well Òthe nature and quality of his actions.Ó The worst sort of insanity is where a man of quiet and temperate habits feels irresistibly impelled to some frightful deed which he utterly detests, and the full enormity of which he has the intellectual power to recognise. Some interpreters of the law, such as Mr. Justice STEPHEN, are inclined to consider that legal insanity covers the case where a man, knowing that what he does is wrong, is unable to control his actions; and, if this be not the law, the sooner the legal definition of madness is altered in this sense the sooner will it be brought into consonance with the ascertained facts of mental maladies.ÒI have had it on my mind for a long time,Ó was one of the remarks which the murderer made when arrested. What was it that WILLIAM GOULDSTONE Òhad on his mind,Ó which led to such direful results? It seems that he was a workman employed in Lower Thames-street, and that he was earning twenty-five shillings a week. He had already three children, all boys, and on the first day of last August his wife became the mother of twins. The increase of his family at a rate quite disproportionate to any increase of wages which he might receive was the cause which so fatally unhinged the young workmanÕs mind. From other remarks which he made to the police, it is perfectly evident that what was preying upon his spirits was the idea of his inability to support a wife and five children. He must have complained in the same strain to his wife herself, for sheÑpoor thingÑstated that after the murder had been committed her husband said to her, ÒYou wished them to be dead, and now they are.Ó But did Mrs. GOULDSTONE ever give vent to so terrible a desire? She, it must be remembered, was in a state of great bodily weakness after her confinement, and to hear the father of the twins upbraiding her and bewailing at the increase of his family may possibly have led her in a moment of desperation to say some wild words to the effect that she wished the children had never been born. But what a home does this disclose to usÑthe poor wife, sorely weighted with the cares of maternity, having to endure the terrible additional burden of unmanly reproaches on the part of a half-insane husband; the blessing of offspring being turned into a positive curse and a source of unnatural despondency and despair!On the 1st of August, the two twins, so soon to be violently destroyed, saw the light, and on the following day the foreman where the father worked noticed Òsomething strangeÓ about him. He had known him for three years before that, and bore witness that GOULDSTONE always seemed fond of his children. But on the day in question he had his attention called to the prisonerÕs strange behaviour, and was obliged to complain of the way in which he performed his work, the only excuse that GOULDSTONE offered being that Òhis head felt very queer.Ó In connection with the plea of insanity set up on the prisonerÕs behalf, these pains in the head become of great importance, more especially when, as two witnesses deposed, they were accompanied by threats of suicide. Why should GOULDSTONE have asked CAKEBREAD, his fellow-workman, six months before the murder to knock out his brains with a hammer? Or what suggestion is there to account for the threats which he uttered at various times to hang himself or to throw himself in front of a railway train? Such devices may be attempted by persons who have committed crimes, and who wish to be thought insane; yet when they take place habitually, long before the homicidal tendency manifests itself, there seems to be but one explanation possible. But, in addition to this evidence, which in itself may not be considered conclusive, two medical men were called for the defence, one of whom swore that GOULDSTONEÕS mother was imbecile, whilst the other affirmed that the prisoner himself was Òof weak mind.Ó Doctors in the witness-box are obliged to be cautious, but there seems no real reason to doubt that the convicted murderer was tainted with some hereditary mental defect, which might easily ripen into downright madness.Unless, therefore, the verdict of the jury and the sentence of the Judge are to be unqualified, it would be well that one or two eminent specialists in cases of mental derangement should be permitted to examine the convicted murderer. Their opinions as to his sanity or insanity would carry more weight than those of a jury who have not studied these painful cases, and who besides brought in their verdict of ÒGuiltyÓ under the disadvantage of hearing simply the defective legal definition of madness. After Dr. MAUDSLEY or Dr. BUCKNILL has pronounced WILLIAM GOULDSTONE to be in possession of sound mental faculties, the public will feel a greater indifference to his fate; and it is the more necessary that care should be taken in this particular instance because of the universal reprobation which the awful crime evoked. We have purposely avoided dwelling on the sickening details of that most merciless deed. It would serve no good purpose to picture the deaths of these little ones, who, although their anguish was soon ended, must have suffered the keenest torments during its brief duration. The most thorough sympathy must be felt for the unfortunate wife, who was deprived at a single blow of every one of her children. Her lot is indeed a hard one, and it might have been some small consolation to her had the jury been able to take the charitable view of her husbandÕs conduct which would have freed him from responsibility. But she must know that the dictates of public justice and the supreme law of self-preservation demand that a man like WILLIAM GOULDSTONE should, if he be not insane, suffer the severest penalty which the law allows.If he is not insane, we say. He was an affectionate husband and father until one day he bethought him that his home was a trifle overcrowded; so he decided to kill the children whom he loved, and to get himself hanged into the bargain, in order to end the little discomfort of which he complained. What sort of mental sanity is there in a man who can make such a stupid calculation of gains and losses as that? The steady, sober citizen, whom the arrival of a child more or less could drive to such a deed of blood as that at Walthamstow, is adjudged to be hopelessly insane by an instinct more potent than a legal verdict.