Source image: Devon_Evening_Express_Aug_9_1883.jpg
Newspaper/title if visible: Not visible in image
Date if visible: Not visible in image
Page/column/article if known: Article headed “TERRIBLE TRAGEDY AT WALTHAMSTOW.”
Transcription scope: Visible article headed “TERRIBLE TRAGEDY AT WALTHAMSTOW.” and its “[BY TELEGRAPH.]” follow-up item
Transcription status: Complete

TRANSCRIPTION

TERRIBLE TRAGEDY AT
WALTHAMSTOW.

FIVE CHILDREN MURDERED.

About half-past five or six o'clock last evening, a most distressing and horrible tragedy was perpetrated at St. James's-street, Walthamstow, a blacksmith, named Gouldstone, having drowned three of his children—Charles, aged three years and-a-half, Herbert, aged two years and a-half, and Frederick, aged sixteen months; and so seriously assaulted another two twin boys, aged but seven days, that both have since died.

Gouldstone, it seems, is a blacksmith in the employ of a firm carrying on business in Lower Thames-street, City, and he has been engaged there for five years. Last night he returned home earlier than usual, and seemed to be in rather a strange temper. He called to a woman who was nursing Mrs. Gouldstone—the latter having given birth to twins only a week since—to bring him his son Frederick, aged 16 months. The little chap, just able to toddle along, went willingly to his father, and laughed at him, unconscious of the fate in store for him. Having kissed and caressed the boy, Gouldstone called the nurse, and said that as he wanted to speak to his wife on a private matter concerning the payment of the doctor's fee, he asked her to leave the room, and she did so. Presently she ran back hurriedly, for she heard a splash of water; and, going to the cistern, which she saw was running over, she was shocked to see therein the bodies of Mr. Gouldstone's three sons—Frederick, aged sixteen months, Herbert, aged two and a half years; and Charles, aged three and a half years. She lost no time in taking them out of the water, but she had hardly done so before she heard Mrs. Gouldstone screaming in her bedroom. The nurse, now thoroughly affrighted, went at once to the door, but found that it was fastened from the inside. She then screamed out for help, and a lady residing close by went into the house, and by their united efforts the door of the bedroom was burst open. The father stood with a hammer in his hand, and, suspecting what had occurred, the nurse exclaimed, “Why, what have you done?” The father answered, “Now I am happy; she is a single woman.” By this time Sergeant Smith, of the N division, with some policemen, had arrived on the scene, and removing the bodies of the three drowned children to the mortuary they sent for a doctor, who pronounced that the infant twins were not dead, but it was only a question of time, for the injuries they received were sure to cause their death. This proved to be true—one of the infants died an hour or so later, and the other succumbed at about eleven o'clock last night. The mother at this time appeared to be in a dying state, though hopes are entertained that she will recover from the shock caused by the fearful double murder that was perpetrated before her eyes. Various speculations are rife as to the cause of the terrible tragedy, none being of a satisfactory nature; but, from the fact that the prisoner, since his wife's last confinement, has not spoken more than a dozen words to her, it may be inferred that during that time he had had something weighing heavily on his mind. Superintendent Green and Inspectors Craggs and Foulard, of the N division, were quickly on the spot investigating the sad tragedy. The prisoner was taken to the Lea-bridge-road Police-station.

[BY TELEGRAPH.]

THE MURDERER COMMITTED FOR TRIAL.

William Gouldstone, the blacksmith, who last night drowned his three children in a cistern, at Walthamstow, was to-day brought before the magistrates charged with wilful murder. The other infants whom he struck with a hammer have died. Ada Hamilton, nurse, detailed the facts of the case as stated above, and said prisoner was not unkind to the children, but appeared strange after the twins were born. Prisoner was remanded.

EDITORIAL NOTES

The newspaper title and date are not visible within the image; they are not supplied from the image itself.
