Source image: Dover_Express_17_Aug_pm.jpg
Newspaper/title if visible: Dover Express
Date if visible: 17 Aug. 1883
Page/column/article if known: Left-hand column and continuation in adjacent column
Transcription scope: “THE WALTHAMSTOW TRAGEDY.” article, including continuation up to before “CHARGE OF SETTING A WIFE ON FIRE”
Transcription status: Complete

TRANSCRIPTION

THE WALTHAMSTOW TRAGEDY.

At Stratford Petty Sessions, before Messrs. Powell, J. Spicer, W. W. Glenny, and A. Lister, William Gouldstone, described as a whitesmith, of 8, Courtney-place, St. James’s-street, Walthamstow, was lately brought up on remand, charged with having wilfully murdered his five children, namely, Charles Gouldstone, three and a half years old; Herbert Gouldstone, two and a half years old; and Frederick Gouldstone, aged sixteen months, by drowning them in a cistern in the house; and two infants, twins, seven days old, by striking them on the head with a hammer as they lay in bed by the side of their mother. A crowd assembled outside the court-house, in the hope of gaining admission, and the court itself was crowded. The prisoner, young man of low stature and fair complexion, with a slight moustache, upon being placed in the dock, nodded complacently in recognition to Mrs. Hamilton, a lodger at 8, Courtney-place, and nurse to Mrs. Gouldstone, but Mrs. Hamilton, who was seated with other witnesses at the side of the court facing the dock, did not appear to notice the nod of the prisoner. The accused then folded his arms and leaned upon the dock rail while the charge was read over to him. Mr. Atkinson, solicitor, of Stratford, appeared for the defence. Mrs. Hamilton was recalled, and the evidence she gave at the former examination read over to her. The prisoner looked calmly around the court, and with firmly compressed lips, maintained a stolid demeanour till the point in the evidence of Mrs. Hamilton where she identified a piece of cord that she saw the prisoner handling in the kitchen of the house just before the murders. When this cord was held up by a policeman for identification by the witness the prisoner pointed significantly to his throat. The hammer used by the prisoner was also produced and identified by the witness. After the evidence of Mrs. Hamilton had been read over, Mr. Wells (the clerk to the magistrate) asked Inspector Craggs, who represented the police, if he wished a further remand to be granted. Inspector Craggs: Yes. The Treasury will take up the prosecution, and I ask for an adjournment for a week. Mr. Atkinson said he had a few questions to put to the witness, Mrs. Hamilton, but if the magistrates were going to again remand the prisoner, perhaps he had better defer them till the next hearing. The magistrates decided to remand the prisoner for a week, and the cross-examination of Mrs. Hamilton was deferred till then. The prisoner was then removed. Though the largest of the three courts was used for the trial of the prisoner, 200 or 300 people were outside, unable to gain admission. In the morning a rumour found credence that the prisoner would be brought from the House of Detention to the Maryland Point Station of the Great Eastern Railway, and accordingly many people went to the station to await his arrival, but they were disappointed, for Gouldstone and the officers in charge of him alighted at Stratford Station, on the main line. By some thoughtlessness the police, instead of bringing Gouldstone from the station to the court in a cab, made him walk the distance of about half a mile. He was not at once recognised, but as soon as he was he was loudly hooted and yelled at until he was got into the court, and out of sight of the mob. When the case was over, some better precautions were taken. The crowd was awaiting the prisoner’s departure to get a glance at him, but very few of them were gratified. The mob being thickest at the door through which prisoners are usually taken away, the police saw this, so they brought their prisoner through the First Court, and then, slipping up a pathway leading to the side entrance of a coffee shop, immediately opposite the public entrance to the court, they were permitted to pass through the shop, and in this manner they got Gouldstone into a cab, and drove hurriedly off with him. Getting scent of the manœuvre, the crowd took a short cut to the station, and meeting the cab, they hooted the prisoner till he arrived at the railway station, where some extra police were on duty, and kept them back until the train had left.

THE INQUEST AND VERDICT.—STRANGE CONDUCT OF JURYMAN.

The adjourned inquest was resumed the following morning at the lodge of the cemetery at Walthamstow. Crowds of people congregated in the cemetery, many inspecting the flower-covered grave of the five children, and others lingering outside the small lodge while the inquest was going on. Upon the resumption of the inquiry, Dr. Lyle, the medical gentleman in attendance upon Mrs. Gouldstone, read a letter he had addressed to the coroner, in which he indignantly protested against the “scandalous and indelicate conduct” of a juryman who had visited Mrs. Gouldstone, the mother of the murdered children, at her house, where the juror commenced “roundly to abuse her,” telling her “it was no use trying to get her husband off the rope, for if he were not hung he would be locked up for life, and he would be as good as dead to her”; and it was alleged that the juryman also said it was the opinion of the jury that she had driven her husband to commit the crime through jealousy. Dr. Lyle complained that the progress of his patient had been retarded by such behaviour. Mr. Blythe (one of the jurymen) said that as he was the person referred to in the letter, perhaps he might be allowed to make an explanation. On the Friday he was unable to accompany the coroner and the other jurymen to inspect the premises upon the adjournment of the inquiry, but he went to the house on the Sunday morning. His visit was of a kindly nature, to see if he could be of any service to Mrs. Gouldstone. The Coroner: Then these observations were not made by you? Mr. Blythe: Well, they might have been. I do not know. The Coroner: The object of the other jurymen and myself in going to the house was simply to see if the children could have been drowned in the cistern. It was purely a view, and no observation should have been made. I myself and the jurymen accompanying me conducted the view with the greatest possible amount of quiet, so that Mrs. Gouldstone, lying ill in the front room, really did not know what was going on. Mr. Blythe: I am in the hands of the other jurymen, if I have been indiscreet. The Coroner: If any such observations were made by you, they were indiscreet. Another juryman (to Mr. Blythe): Did you connect the other members of the jury with your statement. Mr. Blythe: I did not connect the jury with it. The Coroner: So far as I am concerned I repudiate anything said on behalf of this Court. Dr. Lyle: You might have to make an inquiry as to the cause of Mrs. Gouldstone’s death owing to the injury done her. The Coroner: It was extremely unwise, and it may have been done incautiously or unguardedly. We will now proceed with the case. Police-sergeant Smith was then called. He said: Having heard what had taken place at 8, Courtney-place, I went to the house. I there saw the bodies of the five children. The bodies were examined by a medical man, and the three eldest children, who were already dead, were removed to the mortuary. The two infants, not being dead, were allowed to remain. They died during the night, and were subsequently removed to the mortuary. Police-sergeant Bryant, the next witness called, gave formal evidence of the removal of the two dead infants from the house to the mortuary. Inspector Foulkard said: About six o’clock in the evening I was on duty at Lea-bridge-road Police-station, when William Gouldstone was brought to the station-house in charge of Police-constable Cheeseman. Cheeseman said, “This is a charge of murder. This man has murdered his five children.” The prisoner remarked, “That is right, sir. I did it, and now I am happy. I did it like a man too.” I took Mr. Gould, a surgeon, to the house, 8, Courtney-place. We found the three eldest children lying dead on the floor of the kitchen, and the two infants were in a bed in a front room, having been removed into a Mrs. Hamilton’s room. I returned to the police-station, and took the charge against the prisoner of murdering three of his children and attempting to murder two others. He said in answer to it, “Quite right, sir. What condition is the missus in, as I suppose some of you gentlemen have been round?” Mr. Gould, who was present, replied, “Tolerable.” The prisoner then asked, “Are the two young ones dead?” I replied, “No.” About half-past eight o’clock on the following morning I told the prisoner that he was also charged with murdering the two infants, who were dead. His reply was “Yes, sir. The other two are dead then?” I answered “Yes.” Mr. Henry Gould, divisional police-surgeon, of Leyton, said: I accompanied Inspector Foulkard to 8, Courtney-place, St. James’s-street. I found two twin children, seven days old, lying on a bed in the front room. They were both in a comatose condition, breathing in a spasmodic and irregular way. I found that the right side of the head and face of one was much bruised and blackened, and I could feel that the skull was fractured. The back of the head of the other one was much contused and swollen, and I could feel also that the skull of that one was fractured. Blood and froth were issuing from the mouth and nose of one. I observed no other injuries upon them, and the infants were not dead. I then proceeded into the kitchen, where I found three children lying on their backs in a row in the centre of the room. They were dead, and their clothes were sodden, being wet through. I saw no marks of violence about the two younger of the three, but upon the eldest one there was an indentation mark round the neck, apparently caused by a piece of cord such as that which has been produced. Shortly after eight o’clock the same evening, while at the police-station, I received information that one of the twins was dead. I went to the house, and saw the dead infant. At ten minutes past seven o’clock next morning, I again visited the house, and found that the other infant had died. Next day I made a post-mortem examination of the babies. With regard to the two infants, death, in my opinion, was caused by a violent blow, with a blunt instrument. The cause of the death of the other three children, whose bodies were well nourished, was suffocation by drowning. In the case of the eldest boy I do not think the cord used had been tied of itself sufficiently tight to cause suffocation. The coroner, in summing up to the jury, stated that the case, as he said at the commencement of the inquiry, was a heartless and cruel one. As to the cause of death, the medical evidence was clear, showing that the two infants died from an injury to the brain, caused by a violent blow with a blunt instrument, and that the other three children had died from drowning. If the jury were satisfied that death arose from the violence of William Gouldstone, the only verdict they could return was one of wilful murder against him. With regard to the question of sanity or insanity, that was a subject that the jury had nothing to do with, but which concerned another tribunal. If it could be made out that William Gouldstone was not in a sound state of mind that would be a subject for inquiry before a higher Court. The jury at once returned a verdict of “Wilful murder” against William Gouldstone, and the coroner issued his warrant committing the accused. This terminated the inquiry. It is stated that Mrs. Gouldstone is on the whole progressing satisfactorily towards recovery.

FUNERAL OF THE VICTIMS.

The funeral of the five little children has taken place at the Walthamstow Cemetery, the funeral service being conducted by the Rev. T. H. Grantham Robinson, the vicar of St. Saviour’s, Walthamstow, who has taken a great interest in the poor woman, Mrs. Gouldstone, since the terrible occurrence. The funeral had originally been fixed to take place at three o’clock in the afternoon, but in order to prevent the assemblage of a large crowd while the proceedings at the inquest were progressing, it was determined, after the mourners had desired it so, to inter the children three hours earlier than had been in the first instance arranged. Mrs. Graves, in whose house at Bethnal-green Gouldstone and his wife and children lived before they came to Walthamstow, was present, as was also the wife of one of the prisoner’s uncles and her daughter. The children were each put in a small elm coffin, and the whole of them occupy now one common grave, 6ft. deep, in the third-class portion of the cemetery. Not less than 1500 persons were present at the funeral. At about three o’clock troops of people were pouring into the cemetery to replace those who had seen the funeral, and as soon as the grave was filled up it was covered with flowers of all kinds, many a tearful eye being observed around the little mound of earth. During the whole of the afternoon and until the cemetery gates closed, visitors constantly arrived to visit the grave, the top of which by this time was covered with floral tributes, many of which had been carried into the cemetery in small baskets by children, who seemed greatly pleased at the task they had in hand, but withal affected.
