Source image: Essex weekly News Sep 21 1883.png
Newspaper/title if visible: Essex Weekly News
Date if visible: Sep. 21, 1883
Page/column/article if known: Left-hand column and continuation at top of adjacent column
Transcription scope: All of the left-hand column headed “THE WALTHAMSTOW MURDERS. SENTENCE OF DEATH.” and the continuation in the top of the right-hand column through “will in all cases be returned in due course.”
Transcription status: Comfirmed

TRANSCRIPTION

THE WALTHAMSTOW MURDERS.

SENTENCE OF DEATH.

On Friday morning last—before Mr. Justice Day, at the Central Criminal Court—William Gouldstone, aged 24, was placed at the bar to take his trial for the wilful murder of his five children, at Walthamstow, on the 8th of last month. It will be remembered that the circumstances of the case were of a peculiarly dreadful nature—the prisoner first drowning the three eldest children in the cistern, and afterwards striking his twin babes over the head with a hammer as they lay in their mother’s arms.

Mr. Poland and Mr. Montagu Williams prosecuted on behalf of the Treasury, and Mr. J. P. Grain and Mr. Elliott defended the prisoner.

When placed in the dock the prisoner, who had previously pleaded “Not Guilty,” looked carelessly round the Court, and stood calmly, with his thumbs in the sleeveholes of his waistcoat while the Jury were being sworn. 

Mr. Poland having detailed the evidence which would be given.

Ada Hamilton, a monthly nurse, the first witness was called. She repeated the evidence she gave at the inquest, as reported in these columns at the time.–In cross-examination, she said prisoner was very fond of his wife and children; but after the twins were born he seemed very changed. He was always a sober and well-conducted man.–Emma Clarke having given corroborative evidence, p.-c. Cheeseman deposed that when he apprehended him the prisoner said, “Good evening, policeman. I have done it now. I am ready for the rope.”–P.-c. Wheatly said he sat with the prisoner the first night he was locked up. Prisoner told him he had “had this playing on his mind for a long time.”–Medical and other corroborative evidence having been given for the prosecution,

Mr. Grain, for the defence, said, even on the evidence of the prosecution, he would ask the Jury to say that the prisoner was not at the time in a proper state of mind. He would call witnesses to prove that in both branches of the prisoner’s family there was undoubtedly hereditary insanity – that his mother was at this time a lunatic, although not confined–and that his aunt and other relations had been insane. It was not confined to the maternal side, but there was also insanity in the father’s family, as an own cousin had died a lunatic, as did the father’s second cousin and other relations. He thought the Jury would find it their duty to say, under the provision of a new Act of Parliament, that the prisoner did commit the murders, but that he was insane at the time; the result of which verdict would be that he would be detained during her Majesty’s pleasure.

Thomas Gouldstone, father of the prisoner; Robert Gouldstone, the eldest brother of the prisoner; Emily Gouldstone, a sister of the prisoner; William Graves, the prisoner’s late foreman; Charles Cakebread, a fellow workman; and other witnesses having given evidence which supported Mr. Grain’s statement.

Mr. Poland replied, contending that the issue was not whether prisoner was sane, but whether at the time of the murder he knew he was committing a criminal act. Up to August 8th the evidence clearly proved the prisoner had not shown the slightest sign of insanity.

Mr. Justice Day then summed up, pointing out that the sole question the Jury had to determine was whether the prisoner killed the children under circumstances amounting to wilful murder. If he then knew the nature and quality of the act he was committing, he (the prisoner) was guilty of wilful murder.

The Jury then retired, and upon returning into Court after an absence of only fifteen minutes, the Foreman said they found the prisoner Guilty of Wilful Murder.

The Prisoner: I am not guilty.

Mr. Justice Day passed sentence of death in the usual form.

The prisoner, who appeared to be quite unconcerned, was removed to the cells.

THE CONVICT AT THE COUNTY GAOL.

The prisoner arrived at Chelmsford on Friday night, having been brought down by the 8.12 p.m. train, in charge of Mr. Thompson (from the office of Messrs. Gepp and Sons, the Acting Under Sheriffs) and two warders from Springfield Gaol. He was immediately conveyed to the Prison in a cab, and placed in the condemned cell. The dark tweed suit in which the accused was dressed on his arrival at Chelmsford has since been exchanged for the usual prison dress, and his head has been shorn of the light curls which tended to make him somewhat prepossessing in appearance. In height he stands 5ft. 6in., is stoutly built, his complexion is fair, and his demeanour stolid and indifferent. A Prison officer is constantly in attendance upon him, two men having been told off for this work—one watching by day, and the other by night—and he is supplied with everything he asks for. In spite of his terrible situation, Gouldstone eats and drinks heartily, and takes his rest with the felicity of a child. On Sunday he attended the ministrations of the Rev. W. F. Lumley, the Gaol Chaplain, at the Chapel; and singularly enough the Psalm for the day (Psalm 79) contained the following verse: “O let the sorrowful sighing of the prisoners come before thee; according to the greatness of Thy power preserve thou those that are appointed to die.” The verse happens to be an even one (the 12th), and therefore the convict, with the remainder of the prisoners, would repeat it at the service in response to the Clergyman.

INTERVIEW BETWEEN PRISONER
AND HIS WIFE.

LETTER FROM THE CONDEMNED MAN.

Mrs. Gouldstone, who is exerting herself to the utmost to save her unfortunate husband’s life, writes to state her solemn belief that when the crime was committed the convict was not responsible for his act. She says:—

During our five years married life I frequently noticed that my husband was absent-minded and given to brooding. If he were asked a question he would not, no matter how simple it was, or however easy to answer, reply at once. He would think over it, and sometimes say something not concerning the question. We commenced housekeeping on 21s. A week, and latterly he had 25s. It was sometimes difficult to make ends meet when the children came so rapidly, and this weighed on his mind, I fear, although he never spoke of it to me—except in the way of saying how sorry he was that my hands were so full, and that we could not go out together as we used to do. That was the only way in which he ever spoke of the burden of the family. Before we had the first child, and right on till the birth of the second, we regularly went to Church. The second child was weakly, and the first was still only a baby, so that we could not leave the house together, for all his occasional absent ways was he was very lively and as I had all to do with the spending of the money, and did not let him know if there was any trouble about payments when there was a confinement or a sickness in the house, I always found it very easy to ask him to turn his attention to something brighter. He was very kindly with me and the children, handy and willing if they were ailing, and he constantly helped me in household duties. He was a man who had few acquaintances except his own relatives and his fellow-workmen, and he was nearly always at home when not at work, except on the Sunday morning when he occasionally took a walk alone. But for hours together he would keep the children going with his concertina, which he was very fond of playing, while I was engaged in household duties.  The children were very fond of him, and never tired listening to the concertina. If he seemed worried, amusing the children–at which he was very good–or a remark from me would at once change his mood.He was painfully aware of how easy it was for him to get worried, and he has often said to me that it was a good job he had not much to think of, as if he had he believed it would turn his brain. Nothing that he ever said or did before the loss of the little ones gave me the least fear that he would take his own life or that of anyone else. But shortly before my last babies were born he said to me he believed that he had not many weeks to live, which was a strange remark that I have often thought of since. He never complained except that he did not know how I should manage with my hands already so full, and soon be even fuller. But then lots of people manage on less, and we did very well, and when I put this before him he ceased to be moody and absent. I never knew till very lately that there was any insanity on the family. Knowing that now, and looking back on all that has happened, I am certain that he was insane, and that the times I found him sitting thinking lately he was distressing himself about our growing family. You see the eldest was3 1/2, bright and healthy, but the next, 2 1/2, was sickly and could not walk, and the third, being only 16 months, I had practically two babies to mind when the twins were born. But for all this there was no change in his kindly ways to me and the children. He got up early in the morning of the day when the twins were born, and got me a cup of tea, as he often did before, and did every morning from their birth till their death. The thing that struck me most was that during all this time he never took any notice of the babies. They were born about half-past ten, and he immediately went out of the house, and did not return till after 12. He then came in the room to me, but did not speak. His appearance seemed changed, and his eyes were strange and wandering. He came home early on the day he day he attacked the poor things, and I asked him if he had told his foreman about the twins, as he had lived with him once, and we looked upon hims one of our own family, but he said he had not. Since the occurrence I have seen my husband three times at the House of Detention, once at the Old Bailey, and on Tuesday last in the prison at Chelmsford. On each occasion he has been as happy as a child at play. At Chelmsford he said that he had seen several relatives whom he had not met for a long time, but neither he nor I made any reference to the fate of the children. His sister and aunt accompanied me yesterday. He asked me to take care of myself and turning to his relatives, said, “You will take care of her won’t you?” Then he said, “I have broken God's commandment, and I must expect to suffer, but He will forgive me for what I have done." He realises in so far as he believes he will die, but he seems to have no notion of the enormity of killing the children. In a letter I had from him he spoke of them as being in heaven, where he hopes soon to join them. Here is a letter I have from him, dated the 15th, in the same strain:—

“My Dear Wife,—I feel it is a Pleasure to Write a few lines to you and trusting to God that it will find you as well as Can Be Expected after the Dreadful news but I am thankful to God that I feel Happy as I may expect and I Hope you will Look to God to Help you and He Will Comfort you as well as myselfe Dearest Wife I Hope you will Recive this Letter this Evening and than I Hope you won't fret much about me as what God Doest is for the Best and I Hope you will Be able to Come and see Me Over a Short Time and I Hope Aunt and all at Home are quite Well and all Cousins and Rember me to all that know me, and Let Cousin Gouldstone in Mash-street know How I am and I am going to Send a few Lines to Mr. G. Sampford and I Hope all Will forgive me for I am thinking about you all But I Hope you all Will Pray to God to Comfort One and all of you and Bear that in mind that God Will forgive all Dear Wife do not fret about what I Have to Live Upon Because I Can Have What I Wish for in my Liveing from the Prison and you may Belive that the Chappeling will Give me all I Require and I thank God that I Have Been Preparing for the Other World and which I shell do more so now and Live in Hopes to meet you all in Heaven. So Good By God Bless you”

"WILLIAM GOULDSTONE.

Her Majesty’s Prison, Chelmsford, Essex
Sept. 15th, 1883.

have no doubt he did not know and could not help what he did. He was always most affectionate to me and the children, and I cannot think that he should suffer a shameful death for what would be to him, if he only understood it, the most awful distress.”
_____________________________________

The execution will take place at Her Majesty’s Prison at Springfield on Monday morning, October the 1st; and it will therefore devolve upon Mr. J. Oxley Parker, the High Sheriff of Essex to select a hangman in place of Marwood, the late executioner, unless in the meantime a "common hangman" is appointed by the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex. Several applications for the office have been made both at the Gaol and to the High Sheriff.

THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC EXECUTIONER.

Upwards of 1,200 applications have already been received for the post of executioner vacated by the death of Marwood. These have been forwarded from the Home Office and elsewhere, to the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, who are now engaged in considering and sifting them as to have a fitting man at hand to carry out the sentence of the law in case of need. The Sheriffs wish it to be particularly known that to reply to so large a number of applications is impracticable, but the original testimonials, where such have been sent, will in all cases be returned in due course.
