Information of Witnesses taken this tenth day of August 1883, in the Parish of Walthamstow in the County of Essex, before Charles Carne Lewis, one of Her Majesty's Coroners for the said County, touching the deaths of Charles Gouldstone, aged 3 years, Herbert, aged 2 years, Frederick, aged 16 months, and two newly born male children, then and there lying dead.
Ada wife of William Hamilton of No. 8 Courtnay Place, St. James St., Walthamstow, Jeweller.
I and my husband have been lodging in the same house with William Gouldstone, his wife and his 3 children for the last ten weeks namely at the above address. Gouldstone and his wife family also lodged there. They occupied a back room, kitchen and scullery on the first floor. They all slept in the back room and lived in the kitchen. I and my husband occupied the front room on the second floor.
I had been engaged for Mrs Gouldstone in her confinement as nurse. She was confined on the 1st August instant and delivered of the two newly born small children this day shewn to the Jury. William Gouldstone used to come and see his wife every night after her confinement but he never once asked about the two infants. He slept in the kitchen.
He was a White Smith and he returned home last Wednesday night, the 8th August instant, about ¼ past 5. I was at the time in the bedroom with Mrs Gouldstone washing the babies. I had not then seen him. I heard somebody in the kitchen. I then put the baby I was washing down by the side of its mother and went into the kitchen. I saw Gouldstone standing there by the side of the dresser. I said to him, "You did frighten me. I wondered who was here." I made this remark because it was unusually early for him to come home, his usual time being half past 7. He only smiled but made no reply.
I then returned to the bed room and with the baby up again and finished dressing it. William Gouldstone then came into the bedroom. He stood by the bedside of his wife but never spoke. Mrs Gouldstone said to him, "How is it you are so early home tonight?" He replied that he had left when the manager went to his dinner. He worked at 67 Upper Thames St., London.
Mrs Gouldstone then asked him if he had told them at the shop, meaning his workshop, that she was confined. He replied "No." She then had her little boy Frederick on the foot of the bed.
Mrs Gouldstone then took the child up and took it into the kitchen. By this time I had finished washing and dressing the first child and laid it down by the side of its mother. I then went into the kitchen and then saw all 3 of the children playing on the floor, and William Gouldstone was sitting on the fire guard looking at them.
I asked him if he had had his tea. He replied "No." I then told him it was ready for him. He made no reply and I went back into the bed room.
I then took the other baby up and began to wash it. Finished it and then laid it down by the side of its mother. I went back into the kitchen.
I found all 3 of the children in the kitchen and William Gouldstone was still sitting upon the fire guard. I noticed he had a piece of clothes line in his hand tying it. The piece produced is either the same or similar to it.
I then went into the scullery and noticed that the perambulator had been moved from (crossed out) near to the cistern and a chair put in its place. I asked as to who had placed the chair there. William Gouldstone was within hearing. Charles Gouldstone replied "My Daddy put it there."
I then returned into the bed room. I got Mrs Gouldstone out of bed and put her back into bed again. When Wm Gouldstone came and put his head in the doorway I said to him "You can come in Mr Goldstone". Upon that he walked back into the kitchen, mumbling something to himself, but what I did not understand.
I then went downstairs leaving Mrs Gouldstone with her two infants by her side in the bed. So soon as I reached the back door of the house leading into the garden I heard cries of murder. These screams I recognised as coming from Mrs Gouldstone. I directly ran upstairs and tried to open the bedroom door and found it locked on the inside. Mrs Gouldstone called out, "Open the door, he is murdering my children." I tried to force the door open but could not. I then called for help. I called for Mrs Clarke, the landlady of the house and who was in the garden, I called to her 2 or 3 times. She then came running upstairs and we both tried to force the door open. Upon that Wm Gouldstone opened it.
I directly said "Oh you wicked man. What have you done?" I said this in consequence of Mrs Gouldstone had said he was murdering her children. At this time I did not see that anything had been done to the children. Directly he opened the door I saw that Mrs Gouldstone was at the foot of the bedstead. She said "Come and look at my babies and see if he has killed them."
Upon that I entered the room and saw the two babies lying on the pillow and they were both bleeding from their noses and mouths and one had a bruise near one of its eyes. They were both breathing.
I then covered a sheet over them. As I entered the bed room Wm Gouldstone left it. He had nothing in his hands.
When I said to him "You wicked man. What have you done?" He replied "I am not a wicked man. I am a happy man."
In consequence of Mrs Gouldstone asking me to see after the other 3 children I went into the kitchen. As I entered it I saw Wm Gouldstone bringing Frederick in his arms (his clothes were wringing wet) from the scullery into the kitchen. He laid him down on the floor on his back.
I then turned round and saw Mrs Gouldstone walking along the landing into the kitchen. I directly turned back and led her again into the bed room and remained with her there. At this time Mrs Clarke had gone downstairs to send for the police.
Mrs Gouldstone presently asked me to go and tell her husband she wanted to speak to him.
I looked out of the door and saw a Police Constable standing in the kitchen. Wm Gouldstone then came into the bedroom and the Police Constable with him.
He asked him what he had done. He replied "I have killed all the children and I shall be hanged and you will be single."
He said "You wished they were dead and now they are."
She then asked him to give her all the money he had. He then gave her all he had in his pocket. He then kissed her and said good bye. The Police then removed him from the house.
I then went into the kitchen.
I then saw that the other two children namely Charles and Herbert had been lying on the kitchen floor by the side of Frederick. They all 3 appeared to be dead. They were all lying in a row. There was no blood coming from either of them. They all had their clothes on which were sopping wet. Upon that somebody came and felt their pulses and I returned to Mrs Gouldstone.
After Wm Gouldstone had been removed a Police Constable came, and in consequence of enquiries made by him I went into the bed room and in it I found the hammer now produced on the floor by the side of the door. Wm Gouldstone was perfectly sober at the time. I did not see him that morning before he went to his work. The last time I had seen him was the previous Tuesday night at tea time. He then appeared to be perfectly calm. When the twins were born he remarked "I have a very large family and he wished they were dead." I thought then he referred only to the twins. I have only known him during the ten weeks I have lodged there and have only seen him once the worse for drink.
Ada Hamilton
