🧾 WITNESS STATEMENT – WILLIAM CHEESEMAN
Sworn 1883, Pages 1–4

William Cheeseman, Police Constable 86N, stationed at Leabridge, sworn.

---

PAGE 1:

On the afternoon of Wednesday, the 8th August, I was called to a dwelling house, numbered 8 Courtenay Place.

I went upstairs. I saw the prisoner in the kitchen upstairs.

I saw three children lying on the floor there.

Prisoner was in a stooping position over them.

He had his hat and coat off, and his shirt sleeves tucked up.

The clothes of the children appeared to be drenched with water.

When prisoner saw me, he said,
“Good evening, Policeman. I have done it now. I am happy and ready for the rope.”

I said, “What you say will be used in evidence against you.”

He put on his hat and coat and asked me to let him see his wife.

I took him to the...

---

PAGE 2:

...bedroom then.

When we got there, his wife said to him,
“Oh, you wicked man, what have you done?”

He said,
“I have killed all your children, and you will be single again and I shall be hanged.”

His wife asked him for money he had, and he gave it her.

Prisoner kissed his wife and wished her goodbye.

On the way to the station, prisoner said to me:
“When I took my money last week I thought of buying a revolver and doing it with that, but I altered my mind as I thought it would make too much noise. I had a hard job with the two biggest, but the other little b— I soon settled him. I thought it was getting too hot to have five b— kids within three years and a half. I thought it was time to put a stop to it.”

---

PAGE 3:

When I got him to the station he said,
“I did it like a man.”

He was then charged by Inspector Folkard.

He, when the charge was read over to him, said:
“It is quite right, sir.”

When I saw the children lying at the house, I satisfied myself they were all dead.

Cross-examined:

Prisoner seemed excited when I first saw him.

He didn’t appear to be in drink.

He hadn’t a piece of string in his hand.

I never heard the wife of prisoner say she had already wished the children dead.

Two of the children were not dead at the time.

He never said he was short of money or that he had not the means to support his children.

I never heard the word “pawn” in the wife’s presence.

She—

---

PAGE 4:

...made no reply to him when he said he had murdered all the children.

I saw blood on the babies’ faces.

His wife was crying.

This was about 20 minutes to 6 at night.

Sworn this 18th August 1883  
(signed) Nath. Powell  
(signed) William Cheeseman