THE CONVICT GOULDSTONE.
Dundee Courier and Argus, 21 September 1883

It is likely (says a London correspondent of the Leeds Mercury) that strong representations will be made to the Home Secretary on behalf of the man William Gouldstone, who is now under sentence of death for the murder of his five children at Walthamstow. There is a good deal of feeling in medical circles at the manner in which the Judge and jury who tried the prisoner treated the medical evidence of insanity. Not only was the independent medical testimony strongly in favour of the plea of insanity, but the undoubted fact of the insanity of the prisoner's mother was a most important element in the case. The frightful brutality of the crime itself makes it almost impossible to believe that it was committed by a man capable at the time of controlling his own conduct. It is clearly a case for the attention of the Home Secretary, who, with the assistance of competent advisers, can deal with the purely medical evidence at the trial with more deliberation and calmness than can be expected from a jury in Court. Had there been a Court of Appeal for capital cases -- as there would have been if Parliament had done its duty last session -- this case would certainly have gone before it.

The Daily Telegraph says: -- Mrs Gouldstone, who is exerting herself in the utmost to save her unfortunate husband's life, writes to state her solemn belief that when the crime was committed the convict was not responsible for his act. She says -- I have no doubt he did not know and could not help what he did. He was always most affectionate to me and the children, and I cannot think that he should suffer a shameful death for what would be to him, if he only understood it, the most awful distress.

---
TRANSCRIPTION NOTES
Source: Dundee Courier and Argus, 21 September 1883
Repository image: sources/images/Media-coverage/Dundee_Courier_and_Argus_Sep_21_1883.jpg
This is a syndicated reprint of a Leeds Mercury correspondent's report and a Daily Telegraph extract, both already substantially captured in the Western Daily Press 21 September transcription (Elizabeth's full statement and letter), but the opening section here gives a clearer, regionally-syndicated summary of the medical/political pressure building on the Home Secretary in the week immediately following the verdict.
KEY: "Had there been a Court of Appeal for capital cases -- as there would have been if Parliament had done its duty last session -- this case would certainly have gone before it." Confirms that a Court of Criminal Appeal had been under parliamentary consideration in the 1882-83 session but had not been enacted; the Gouldstone case is being used in the press as an argument for its necessity. Useful context for Part Three on the broader legal-reform climate.
KEY: Confirms the closing line of Elizabeth's statement verbatim, matching the Western Daily Press version already transcribed.
