THE LATE REV. T. H. GRANTHAM ROBINSON.
THE Rev. Thomas Harrison Grantham Robinson, who has recently passed away, was one of the most laborious and successful of the devoted band of clergy now labouring in the great Metropolitan District. His work was, however, of that unostentatious kind which does not attract the notice of the general public; and even his most intimate friends confess that they never realised how extensive and profound was his influence until his sudden death drew forth the unmistakable testimony of mourning thousands. He was not a writer, nor did he court publicity as a preacher, and his name may, therefore, be strange to many who are familiar with the names of the leaders of the Church; but it may be truly said that many a clergyman who for a quarter-century, perhaps, has enjoyed general popularity, does not receive at the last a tribute of grief and affection such as that which marked the early death of Mr. Grantham Robinson.
The following is taken from the Walthamstow & Leyton Guardian:—“The illness which closed the laborious and honoured career of the late Vicar of S. Saviour’s was unusually short. On Sunday evening, March 16th, he preached with his usual energy; on Monday he visited the parish, and held a confirmation class in the evening; early on Wednesday he felt unwell and retired to bed. Subsequently he became rapidly unconscious. On Thursday the dangerous nature of his state was fully recognised, and additional medical assistance was procured from London. But the disease was making its way with irresistible force, and at seven o’clock on Friday morning he passed quietly away.
“Thomas Harrison Grantham Robinson was born in Ireland, in July, 1837. By his mother’s side he was descended from the family of Wade, of whom the celebrated Marshall Wade was an illustrious member. And some of this family took a warm interest in the religious movement of the last century. Religious earnestness was thus a kind of tradition in his family, and, by giving a tinge to his early feelings, determined at last his entire career.
“He was privately educated, and entered King’s College, London, where he completed his theological training; and he also belonged to the University of Dublin. His course at King’s College was a very successful one, and he was early marked out as a man who must rise. He was ordained to the curacy at Whitechapel, and there, through the illness of his rector, and his enforced absence from that parish for six months, Mr. Robinson was early made acquainted with hard and responsible work. Leaving Whitechapel he became Secretary to the Prayer Book and Homily Society, and while holding
this position he fulfilled also the duties of assistant curate at S. Augustine’s, Highbury, under the Rev. Gordon Calthorp. In 1865 the present Vicar of Walthamstow offered him the living of S. James’s, and a few years later, through the munificence of Mr. R. Foster, the magnificent church of S. Saviour’s was erected in his parish.”
He was a High but not an extreme Churchman, and one most remarkable feature in his ministry was that while he taught Church doctrines in the most distinctive way, he yet drew to himself the respect and affection of dissenters. Several nonconformist ministers attended his funeral, and graceful tributes to his memory were offered in the various chapels in the neighbourhood. The poor of the district expressed their grief at his loss with a sincerity that could not be mistaken; while the working classes mourned him as a departed leader and friend. Altogether it would not be easy to find a ministry more energetic and many-sided than his; and the success that followed him in all his works was more than remarkable.
There was a reason for all this. He was diligent, punctual, earnest, and devoted. His presence was commanding. His style in the pulpit was vigorous and animated. But it was touching to notice how in various ways the public press and his multitude of mourning friends instinctively discovered in their utterances of sorrow the grand secret of his life. He was large-hearted, good humoured, and kind to all. With him every parishioner was a friend. A pleasant word, a thoughtful enquiry, made each one feel as they met him that a hearty friend was passing by. Those who listened to his sermons on Sundays knew all this. His Christian admonition came from lips which were daily uttering words of kindness. The public instinct never fails to read the secret of a man’s life, and the Walthamstow and Leyton Guardian expressed the general feeling when on the day of his death it said: “All classes will mourn him. Sympathetic, tender-hearted, and generous, he was the beau ideal of a gentleman and an Englishman. The poor have lost a never failing friend, and those in better circumstances a hearty, sincere, and lovable brother. The Church will miss him. He was sincere and conscientious; and no one who has listened to his words could ever doubt they came from the heart of a Christian.”
The Walthamstow Express, writing the week after the funeral, summed up the late Vicar’s character and work in these words:—“Despite the claims of other subjects upon men’s attention, the one topic uppermost in the thoughts of everybody in Walthamstow is the grievous and irreparable loss caused by the death of the Vicar of S. Saviour’s. Ever yet it seems difficult to realise how severe the loss is, for men still feel that indescribable influence which he exerted over everyone. Mr. Robinson was a singularly lovable man
