Source image: IPN Aug 18 1883 inside detail 1.png; IPN Aug 18 1883 inside detail 2.png
Newspaper/title if visible: The Illustrated Police News
Date if visible: Not visible in supplied crops
Page/column/article if known: Article headed “TERRIBLE TRAGEDY AT WALTHAMSTOW.”
Transcription scope: The article beginning “TERRIBLE TRAGEDY AT WALTHAMSTOW” across the two supplied detail images, ending with “has only been built two years.”
Transcription status: Complete

TRANSCRIPTION

TERRIBLE TRAGEDY AT WALTHAMSTOW.

[SUBJECT OF ILLUSTRATION.]

On Wednesday evening the usually quiet neighbourhood of St. James’s-street, Walthamstow, was thrown into a state of great excitement, by the discovery that a blacksmith, named William Gouldstone, living at 8, Courtney-place, had murdered his five children. Gouldstone, it seems, is a blacksmith in the employ of a firm carrying on business in Upper Thames-street, City, and he has been engaged there for the last five years. On Wednesday evening he returned home earlier than usual, and, although he seemed to be in rather a strange temper, no danger whatever was apprehended. Mrs. Gouldstone had only given birth to twins a week since, and while a lodger in the house, who was acting as monthly nurse, was washing one of the babies, the father drowned his three sons—Frederick, aged sixteen months; Herbert, aged two and a half years; and Charles, aged three and a half years—in the cistern. He then went upstairs, and while in the bedroom alone with his wife, struck the two infants murderous blows with a hammer. The wife’s screams brought assistance, when the murderer opened the door and said, “I have killed my children. I am a happy man now. Your other three children are in the cistern. I shall be hanged and you will be single. You wished them dead, and now they are.” He then kissed his wife. Serjeant Smith, of the N Division, with some policemen, shortly after arrived on the scene, and removing the bodies of the three drowned children to the mortuary, they sent for a doctor, who pronounced that the infant twins were not dead, but it was only a question of time, for the injuries they had received were sure to cause their death. This proved to be true—one of the infants died an hour later, and the other succumbed during the night.

EXAMINATION OF THE MURDERER.

William Gouldstone, aged twenty-six, a blacksmith, residing at 8, Courtney-place, St. James’s-street, Walthamstow, was brought up in custody at Stratford Police-court on Thursday, and charged with murdering his three children—Charles, aged three and a half years; Herbert, aged two and a half years; and Frederick, aged sixteen months—by putting them into a water-cistern, at his residence on the 8th inst. He was further charged with murdering his two infant children, aged seven days, by striking them on the head with a hammer at the same time and place.

The prisoner is a man standing not more than 5 ft. 4 in., fair, and with light hair. When his case was called on he folded his arms over the dock, but, after being there for about two minutes, he was ordered out, some applicants for the transfer of a public-house licence having come late. When he returned he placed his hands together, and then rested his head on his right hand. He seemed careworn, and was continually looking about the court.

Ada Hamilton, wife of William Hamilton, was the first witness called. She said: I am a monthly nurse, and know the prisoner. He lives at 8, Courtney-place, St. James’s-street. I have been acting as nurse to his wife, who was confined on last Wednesday week at night of twins, both male children, and I have been residing in the house as a lodger for the last ten weeks. There were three other children in the family—Charles Gouldstone, three years and a half old; Herbert Gouldstone, aged two years and a half; and Frederick Gouldstone, aged sixteen months. Last night, between five and six o’clock, I was in Mrs. Gouldstone’s bedroom washing the two babies. I was in the act of washing them when prisoner came in from the street at about five o’clock or a quarter-past five. I heard him go into the kitchen. The two eldest children were at that time in the kitchen playing, and Freddy was in the bedroom with me. When I heard him come in I went to the kitchen just to see who it was, and I returned. I spoke to him, and said, “Oh! you did frighten me; I wondered who it was.” He made no reply. I did not notice anything particular about him. I went back into the bedroom, and finished washing the babies, when he came in. This was ten minutes after he came indoors. He stood by his wife’s bedstead, but he did not speak to her. She asked him, “How is it you are home so early?” He said, “I left the place while the manager had gone to dinner, and I came home.” His wife then asked if he had told them at the shop about her being confined, and he said, “No;” with that he took the little boy Frederick off the bed, and went into the kitchen. [Here the witness began to cry.] When I had finished washing the first infant I went into the kitchen, leaving the twins by their mother’s side. I went into the kitchen, and saw him sitting on the fire-guard, the three children playing on the floor. He had a piece of string in his hands. I have seen it since. It was similar to that produced by Inspector Foulkard. I asked him if he had had his tea, and he said, “No.” I told him it was ready for him, and with that I went back to the bedroom, and washed the other baby. I put it into the bed by the side of the mother, and I then returned to the kitchen. I went to the washhouse and saw a chair by the cistern. The children, at this time, were still playing in the kitchen. The cistern was in the washhouse, up high. The prisoner was sitting on the fire-guard in the kitchen. Having noticed the chair under the cistern where a perambulator had stood, I asked who put it there, and the little boy Charlie said, “Daddy did.” I again went back into the bedroom, and got Mrs. Gouldstone out of bed. I made her bed, and she got in again. Just at this time, as she was getting in, the prisoner came along the passage, and looked into the room. I said, “You can come in, Mr. Gouldstone.” He made some answer—a mumbling noise—which I could not hear. With that I said to Mrs. Gouldstone, “Shall I leave the room a minute; perhaps Mr. Gouldstone wants to speak to you?” and she said, “Yes, do, my dear.” With that I left the room and went downstairs. I heard the prisoner open the kitchen door—which was shut as I passed it—walk across the landing, and into the room. I got to the yard door, when I heard screams of “Murder!” from the prisoner’s wife. I ran upstairs and tried to open the door, she still crying “Murder!” inside. I could hear nobody speak but her. I heard her say, “Good God! he is murdering my children.” I did not hear the cries of the children. Being unable to open the door, I called out, “Help!” three or four times, and the landlady of the house, who was in the yard, ran towards me. We both pushed the door to try to force it open, but could not do so. With that the prisoner opened the door. The prisoner’s wife was still crying out. He opened the door, and I said, “Oh, you wicked man; what have you done!” Mrs. Gouldstone was standing at the foot of the bedstead. She said, “Come and look at my babies, and see if he has killed them.” With that I passed into the room, and I saw the two babies lying on a pillow behind her. She was down at the foot, just where I had laid the babies. They were each bleeding from the nose and mouth, and one had got a bruise right over one of its eyes. They were both breathing. With that I covered a sheet over them. When I said, “Oh, you wicked man!” Mr. Gouldstone said, “No, I am not a wicked man. I am a happy man now. Your other three children are in the cistern.” He said the latter to his wife. The prisoner then went into the kitchen. I stopped with his wife for a few seconds. Mrs. Gouldstone said, “He has killed the other three children; go and see.” I went into the kitchen, and saw the prisoner coming in the kitchen door from the washhouse with the boy Frederick in his arms. He laid him on the floor. I turned back and saw his wife coming on to the landing. I ran back to her, as I did not want her to see the child. It seemed as if he had been in the water, and appeared to be dead. I was very much frightened. I went back to the prisoner’s wife, and I did not leave her for ten minutes. When I went into the kitchen again I saw the three children lying on the ground, all of a row, side by side. They were swamped with water. By this time a gentleman (a chemist) was present. The prisoner was also in the kitchen at the time. He said nothing, and no one spoke to him. I saw a police-constable come afterwards, and saw the prisoner taken into custody. He and the policeman went into the bedroom, and his wife asked him to leave all the money he had, as she had the doctor to pay. Both the children were now dead. One died half an hour after, and the other two this morning. Witness did not hear the prisoner charged by the police. Prisoner said, “All the children are dead now. I shall be hanged, and you will be single. You wished them dead, and now they are.” He then kissed his wife. I have lived in the house for ten or eleven weeks, and the prisoner has always lived on good terms with his wife; but I noticed he appeared strange after the twins were born. He was not unkind to the children; he seemed fond of them all; but he had not looked at the twins. The wife is now dangerously ill. The prisoner was remanded.

RE-EXAMINATION ON SATURDAY LAST.

The prisoner, William Gouldstone, was again brought up at Stratford on Saturday morning. While in the cells of the court he was visited by two of his brothers. He seemed calm and perfectly unconcerned at his position.

When placed in the dock the prisoner immediately folded his arms and rested them on the front. He listened intently to the charges as read by Mr. Powell, the chairman. Mr. Atkinson appeared for the prisoner.

Mr. Wells, the clerk, read over the depositions of the witness Ada Hamilton, the nurse, during which the prisoner furtively glanced around alternately at the Bench, the reporters, and the people in the court, which was crowded. By and bye he leaned his full length as much as he could over the breadth of the dock, and again looked around, moving his feet, as if marking time with the clerk’s reading of the depositions. When the constable produced the hammer it was found in a neck handkerchief, and the prisoner looked around, pointed to it, and then to his throat, as much as to say, “That is mine.” The reading of the evidence was delayed a moment or so, while Colonel Howard, a justice, spoke to the chairman, after which Mr. Lister left the bench. The reading of the depositions was then proceeded with, the prisoner meantime watching the clerk intently, though instantly his attention was drawn to the body of the court. After about five minutes’ absence Mr. Lister returned to the court and took his seat on the Bench, the prisoner glancing at him as he entered. When the hammer was produced, the nurse added to her evidence that it was not until the prisoner was taken into custody that she saw it. The constable asked her for it, and she went into the bedroom and found it behind the door, near the dressing-table. She noticed it, but saw no marks on it. She gave it to the constable.

Mr. Wells, the clerk, here had a short conversation with the Bench, and afterwards asked Inspector Craggs if he wanted a remand. He said yes, and the prisoner was remanded for a week to give the Treasury time to prosecute.

FURTHER PARTICULARS.

William Gouldstone, the murderer, was a man ordinarily by no means of the care-worn, roving-eyed description he presented in court. An uniform quietness of manner characterised him, and to all his surroundings he was a quiet, simple-minded, retiring man. Though twenty-six years of age, and rather stoutly built, he preserved a great deal of boyishness. He was not, according to description, a thoroughly illiterate man, who had no conversational ability. The young couple had been married four years and a half, but had only lived at Walthamstow for eleven months. They had the reputation of being as contented a couple as could be found, and Mr. Clark, their landlord, stated that it was only a day or two before he remarked to his wife how very fortunate they were in their present lodgers—a remark suggested by previous unsatisfactory experiences. Gouldstone showed, in a reserved sort of way, a disposition to be friendly with Clark, and they had been out for a Sunday morning walk on a few occasions. They would stroll along a good distance by the river, and only on one occasion entered a public-house together. Gouldstone always practised this strict abstemiousness, though he did drink beer. He did not smoke at all. On the Saturday previous to the tragedy he went to his beanfeast, but Mr. Clark says he saw him at ten o’clock at night quite sober. Despite the young family, the Gouldstones were never known to be in money difficulties, and they paid their rent with strict regularity. Gouldstone never spoke to anyone of his affairs, and his fellow-workmen at the wharf in Upper Thames-street knew little or nothing concerning him. Even in his friendly walks with Clark he never mentioned anything about himself. The walks were pursued with long intervals of silence, for if his companion started a conversation on any topic of the day Gouldstone would be out of his element, and was more at home in some little question of boyish games. All that could be learnt of Gouldstone’s story is very simple. The son of a country farrier, somewhere in the district of Saffron Walden, he had been trained up in a branch of his father’s business. On coming to London he obtained work at the Kirkley Wharf, 67, Upper Thames-street, and for a time lived in Bethnal-green, afterwards moving to Walthamstow. Gouldstone is believed to have one or two relatives in Walthamstow. His country origin was discovered through his aptitude in killing rabbits. Mr. Clark keeps these animals, and Gouldstone had often served him by killing one, and it was only last week he disposed of a mischievous doe. Gouldstone all the time he lived in Walthamstow came home regularly, and amused himself at home. He was a great amateur musician, playing the cornet, the flute, and other wind instruments. His conduct with his children was never boisterous or playful, and the landlord said his manner always seemed reserved even to them, though he was generally kind. Only one child, the eldest, could walk. They were rather weakly children, nothing sturdy. Gouldstone, in speaking of them, would always say, “There’s my Charley,” or “There’s my Herbert.” The children were not even noisy infants. From first to last there was nothing in the character of Gouldstone that would ever have led to its being supposed for one instant he was capable of a crime almost unequalled in its cool and determined ferocity. His wife is described as “a good housewife and ladylike woman.” They were, in fact, a very ordinary couple, little known to their neighbours, and studied their own affairs only. The few people that did know Gouldstone liked the man. He was, however, so little known in his own neighbourhood that when the news of the crime first spread, many a wrong man was mistaken for him. Of the regularity of Gouldstone’s habits, and his apparently well-balanced mind, it is related that only on one occasion did he miss his train, the 6.4 a.m. from St. James’s-street to Liverpool-street, and that was due to a clock going wrong. His landlord said he was as good as a timepiece. He continued in his own quiet way until the night the twins were born, but from that time became moody and discontented. When the nurse first announced to him the intelligence of the double birth, he gave one look of anger, said nothing, but put on his coat and hat and went straight out. On his return he made no remark, nor did he subsequently until after the murders. He would not look at the babies and never told anyone about them, but, left to himself, brooded and brooded until the fatal Wednesday. Despite the man’s mania, it is to be feared there was only a too fiendish cunning in the deed. He chose his time and went home early on purpose, Mr. Clark ordinarily being first.

When the murderer was taken away by the police the poor wife, perhaps happily, lost consciousness for an hour; and through the night, which few thought she would survive, alternately broke into cries, to swoon away again. Two doctors have since been in attendance on her, but have administered no medicines, commanding in its stead a perfect quiet, and allowing nature to take its own course. They have been supplying her with jellies and light strengthening food. She asked and begged to see her dead little ones, but the doctors had to be stern in their refusal, dreading its effect on the sufferer’s brain. Their chief fear now is that her reason will be affected by the terrible shock. She lies in a very low state. Some incautious people, with nothing but their own idle curiosity to satisfy, invaded the house and asked to see the poor woman, but of course were denied. The police, anticipating a crowd of sightseers, have volunteered a good body of their staff to keep the press back, but it is to be hoped their services will not be required, and respect will be had for the woman’s dangerous condition.

The scene of the murder is a smart two-storeyed house, with a bay-windowed parlour. It is parallel with St. James’s-street Railway-station. The part of Walthamstow in which it is situated is a thin, straggling neighbourhood, and the house, though one of the first of its row, has only been built two years.
