Source image: IPN p2 Aug 25 1883.png
Newspaper/title if visible: THE ILLUSTRATED POLICE NEWS
Date if visible: [not visible in requested crop]
Page/column/article if known: Lower half of left column and upper half of right column; article headed “THE TRAGEDY AT WALTHAMSTOW.”
Transcription scope: From “THE TRAGEDY AT WALTHAMSTOW.” through “reserve his defence.”
Transcription status: Needs review

TRANSCRIPTION

THE TRAGEDY AT WALTHAMSTOW.

[SUBJECT OF ILLUSTRATION.]

On Saturday, at the Stratford Petty Sessions, William Gouldstone, twenty-six years of age, described as a blacksmith, who lived at 8, Courtney-place, St. James’s-street, Walthamstow, was charged on remand with having murdered his five children on the 8th inst.—namely, Charles Gouldstone, aged three years and a half; Herbert Gouldstone, two years and a half old; and Frederick Gouldstone, aged sixteen months, by drowning them in a cistern; and two twin infants, seven days old, by striking them on the head with a hammer. Mr. H. Batchelor conducted the prosecution on behalf of the Treasury authorities, and Mr. J. W. Atkinson, solicitor, Stratford, represented the accused.

The prisoner, against whom a coroner’s jury has already returned a verdict of wilful murder, was placed in the dock shortly after eleven o’clock. After a hurried glance at the crowded court, he quietly folded his arms across the dock-rail, and while the charge was being read he again gazed around the court, nodding, with a smile, to some one whom he recognised. The accused, while maintaining an unconcerned aspect, so far as regarded the proceedings, very often changed his position. He would stretch across the dock, with his head resting on his folded arms on the bar in front of him; then he would stand erect, with great firmness; and next he would lean against the siderail of the dock, all the while, however, maintaining his cool demeanour. A tin mug full of water was brought into the dock for his use during the hearing, but he merely sipped a little water, rested his elbows on the rail till the case was concluded.

Mr. Batchelor, at the commencement of the proceedings, intimated that the evidence he would call would be very short, and he asked that the prisoner should be committed for trial.

Mrs. Hamilton, a lodger at 8, Courteney-place, St. James’s-street, and who attended as nurse upon Mrs. Gouldstone, was recalled and cross-examined by Mr. Atkinson. She said: I have known the prisoner since the 1st of June, and had ample opportunities to notice his demeanour. Up to this time he was always very kind to his wife. The twins were born on August 1, and after that date I noticed a great difference in the prisoner. I have never seen him the worse for drink but once. He was not addicted to drink. After August 1 he appeared to be in a desponding state. He would come in and sit down and seldom speak to any one. I have never heard him speak a thing against his wife, and never heard him complain of her pawning his things. He was very kind to her, and I have never known him to speak a cross word to her. I have never heard his wife say that she wished the children were dead. Since the birth of these twins I have noticed he appeared absent. He never said anything to witness about a fit of kleptomania coming on him. He did not speak to that effect on the Sunday previous. As to the twins I heard him say nothing when I was by his wife’s side. When he was sitting on the fireguard in the kitchen just before the murder he was not gazing into the fire. He had his back to it, and was twiddling a piece of string about. I did not notice that there was a slip noose in the cord. It may have been there, but I did not notice it. He looked in the bedroom and muttered something. I saw him in the bedroom after the occurrence, and I did not notice a hammer till afterwards, when the constable asked for it. After the death of the three children I said, “Oh, you wicked man, what have you done?” He replied, “I am happy now.” I saw one of the children first, and shortly afterwards the other two. I went to see if they were dead or alive, when I saw him carrying the first one. He seemed very excited—not absent or wandering, but excited. He said, “I’ve done it, I’ve done it.” When the constable took him into the bedroom, he said to Mrs. Gouldstone, “I have murdered all your children; you wished them dead, and now you have got your wish.” I do not know any of his family.

Police-constable William Cheeseman, 86 N, said: I was on duty at St. James’s-street, Walthamstow, on the day in question, and was called to 8, Courteney-place. I went into the kitchen, and saw three children lying on the floor there, the prisoner being in a stooping position over them. He had his hat and coat off, and his shirt sleeves were tucked up. The clothes of the children appeared to be drenched with water, and were thoroughly wet. When the prisoner saw me he said, “Good evening, policeman; I have done it now, I am happy, and am ready for the rope.” I told him that what he said would be used in evidence against him, and then he put on his hat and coat, and asked me to let him see his wife. I then took him into the bedroom to his wife, and when I got there his wife said, “Oh! you wicked man; what have you done?” The prisoner said, “I have killed all your children, you will be single again, and I shall be hanged. His wife asked him for money, and he gave it her. The prisoner then kissed his wife, wished her “Good-bye,” and I took him away. On the way to the station the prisoner said, “When I took my money last week I thought of buying a revolver to do it with; but I altered my mind, as I thought it would make too much noise.” He also said, “I had a hard job with the two biggest, but the other little one I soon settled. I thought it was getting too hot, for I have had five kids in three years and a half, so I thought it time to put a stop to it.” When I got him to the station he said, “I did it like a man.” When the charge was read over to him at the station he said “Quite right, sir.” When I saw the three children at the house I satisfied myself that they were dead.

By Mr. Atkinson: The moment the prisoner saw me he spoke first. He seemed excited at the time, but not such an excitement as from drink. He had no appearance of drink. When he spoke about being “ready for the rope,” he had not a piece of rope in his hand. When in the bedroom I did not hear the wife say that she wished the children were dead. She did not supplement her request for money with the wish that the children were dead. The whole of the children, as a matter of fact, were not dead. It was at the station that he said “Quite right, sir.” He said nothing there about not having the money to support his children. I did not hear the word “pawn” mentioned in the wife’s presence. The wife made no reply whatever when he said he had murdered all her children. I saw the two infants were covered up. They had blood on them. I did not see them move. When the wife asked for money he gave her some—a two-shilling piece or a half-crown and a shilling. It was about twenty minutes to six that I went to the house. I saw no evidence of any meals about—no provisions of any kind.

Police-constable James Honey, 41 N Reserve, was next called. He said: I am stationed at the Lea-bridge-road. At about ten o’clock on August 9 I was in the High-street, Walthamstow, and in consequence of information received I went to Dr. Twining, and then to 8, Courteney-place. When I got there Dr. Twining was there and examining the bodies of the three children in the kitchen.

Mr. Batchelor, in reply to the Bench, said he did not propose to call Dr. Twining, as he was very ill. If it was necessary at the trial he would, of course, have to do so.

Examination continued: Dr. Twining handed me the piece of tunic I produce. I could see that three children were dead. I went into the front room and saw the two other infants. One of them was bleeding from the mouth, and both their heads appeared to be seriously injured. I remained there till Dr. Gould came.

By Mr. Atkinson: The string which had been around the eldest child’s neck was not tight; it was loose.

George Foulkard, a police inspector of the N Division, stationed at Lea-bridge-road Station, said: I was at the station on the 8th inst., when the prisoner was brought in by Police-constable Cheeseman. The constable said, “This is a charge of murder; this man has murdered his five children.” The prisoner said, “That is right, sir. I did it like a man, too.” I went to the house with Dr. Gould, and at about eight o’clock returned to the station and charged the prisoner with murdering his three children, Charles, Herbert, and Frederick, and with attempting to murder his two male infants. He said, “Quite right, sir. What condition was the missus in? I suppose some of you gentlemen have been around.” Dr. Gould said, “Tolerable.” The prisoner then asked, “Are the two young ones dead?” I said, “No.” At half-past eight o’clock the following morning I charged him with the murder of the two younger children. He said, “Yes, sir. The other two are dead, then?” I said, “Yes.” When I went to 8, Courteney-place, I examined the cistern. It is about 6 ft. from the floor, high up, near the ceiling. It was the top of it that was 6 ft. from the ceiling. The top of it to the ceiling was about 10 in., the floor. The top of it to the ceiling was about 10 in., the cistern being about 14 in. deep.

By Mr. Atkinson: The prisoner volunteered these statements. He was a little excited, I thought, but very slight. He was not so excited as I should expect. He braced himself up when he said, “I did it like a man too.” About two hours had elapsed since the prisoner last saw his wife. Then he asked me how she was.

Henry Wheatley, police-constable, 208 N, stationed at Lea-bridge, said: About a quarter to seven on the evening of the 8th inst. I was in the cell passage of the station leading to the cell where the prisoner was. The prisoner said to me, “I have had an extra drop of drink to-day to accomplish this job. There’s five of them gone to glory, and it is a good job too.” Later on, at half-past seven o’clock, he said, “I am sorry for my wife and parents; but the children will be better off in Heaven, if there is such a place. It is better than leaving them to the mercy of the world.” At about nine o’clock he said, “I wish I had killed the little ones out of the way. I don’t know if I hit them once or twice. I have had this playing on my mind for a long time.”

By Mr. Atkinson: He volunteered these statements. He was under my immediate observation all the time. I did not hear him rambling or mumbling to himself. I observed no traces of drink about the prisoner. He first stated he had killed the five, and then said he wished he had killed the little ones. I did not in the least observe any strangeness about him; he was very cool.

Mr. Henry Gould, examined by Mr. Batchelor, said: I reside at Lea-bridge-road, Leyton. I am a M.R.C.S., and L.S.A. London, and divisional surgeon of police for the district. On the 8th inst., at six o’clock, I was called by Inspector Foulkard, and went to 8, Courteney-place. I went into the front room on the first floor, and there on a bed saw two children only a few days old. They were male children. I examined them, and found they had both received injuries to the head; I felt that the skull of each was fractured, and blood and froth were issuing from them. I thought it impossible that the children could live. I went into the kitchen, and there saw three children lying in a row, side by side, their feet being all one way. They were quite dead, and their clothes saturated with water. One of the children was naked, Dr. Twining having taken the clothes off. I saw no marks of violence on two of them, but on the eldest (Charles) I found on the neck an indentation mark of a stout cord. It had been put around the neck. At seven o’clock I again went to the house, and saw that one of the two infants had died. Soon after seven o’clock the next morning I went and found that the other one was dead. Since that time I have made post-mortem examinations of the bodies of the whole of the five children. As to the two younger, I found that their death had been caused by the violence used that fractured the skull of each. As to the three others, from the condition of the heart and lungs, I came to the conclusion that they died from suffocation, caused by drowning. All the bodies of the three children were well nourished. On the three there were no marks of violence, except the indentation on the neck of the eldest.

By Mr. Atkinson: I have only seen the prisoner in connection with this case. I would not like to say that I am perfectly acquainted with the “Cyclopædia of Practical Medicine.”

Mr. Wells, the clerk, said this was scientific evidence of the doctor, and he was not well up in questions of insanity, if that was to be referred to, as that was a speciality.

Mr. Batchelor concurred with Mr. Wells that insanity was not a question for the consideration of this Court.

Mr. Atkinson said he would not press the question. This concluded the evidence, and the prisoner was committed for trial, Mr. Atkinson intimating that the accused would reserve his defence.
