THE LANCET
Correspondence -- "Audi alteram partem."
22 September 1883

THE CASE OF WILLIAM GOULDSTONE, THE WALTHAMSTOW MURDERER.
To the Editor of THE LANCET.

SIR, -- This case occupied the greater part of Friday last, being tried before Mr. Justice Day. The facts were clear. A man, aged twenty-six, after the birth of twins, became depressed, and a week later killed the whole of his five children, drowning the three elder and fracturing the skulls of the twins. There is no doubt about the fact of the killing, and the only plea was that of insanity; and as the case affords another example of the unsatisfactory position in which skilled experience is placed in a court of law I give some particulars. Evidence was given that the prisoner had been a sober, industrious man, fond of his wife and children, and in constant work; there was nothing of special consequence in the case noticed till after the birth of the twins, when he became moody, but on inquiry it was elicited that the prisoner had been in the habit of saying he wished he were dead. He suffered from severe pains in his head at times and was much distressed by a large double hernia. He said to his fellow-workmen he wished he were dead; he told me himself, but this was not brought out in evidence, that he had very bad dreams and had seen heaven opened and had heard the voice of God, but, he added, he knew it was only dreaming. Before the murder he said he took some extra drink to fit himself for the perpetration of the crime, and this was one of the most damning pieces of evidence against him. He killed his children in the most deliberate way, locking the door of his wife's room before he killed the babes; when he had killed them he opened the door and said he had done it, thus, as the judge said, showing he knew the quality of the act committed; he also told the policeman he was now ready for the rope, this, as the judge said, showing he was aware of the criminality of the act.

Now for some other facts. His mother is insane, and was said to have been insane when he was born; his mother's sister also is a chronic lunatic, with suicidal inclinations and ideas of ruin impending. On his father's side evidence of one second cousin being insane was given, and it was said several other members of the father's family were insane. But the judge ridiculed the notion of bringing in second cousins, and even threw doubt upon my bona fides when I said that marked insanity on one side, and taint, though distant, on the other would increase the risk of insanity in the offspring. Counsel were not allowed to ask what my opinion was of the sanity of a man who had behaved as the prisoner had, and so my evidence was reduced to the very bald statement that at the time I saw the man he was not a marked case of insanity. I do not know how one is ever to get the legal mind to see that every insane person is not a raging lunatic.

The prisoner is just what one would have expected from his history; a feeble minded, rather weakly, good man, who did his mechanical work well, and went home to his family. Anxiety about his increasing family at once developed the latent weakness, and he feared ruin, just as so many lunatics do, and took an insane way to get out of the trouble. If this man is hanged, I think it will be a scandal to law, or rather justice. -- I am, Sir, yours obediently,

Bethlem Hospital, Sept. 14th, 1883.    GEO. H. SAVAGE, M.D.

---
TRANSCRIPTION NOTES
Source: The Lancet, 22 September 1883 (letter dated 14 September, the day of the verdict)
Repository image: sources/images/Media-coverage/William Gouldstone Lancet letter.png
Savage's own letter, written and submitted on the very day of the verdict. This is the single most psychiatrically significant document in the archive.

KEY -- ENTIRELY NEW AND NOT FOUND IN ANY OTHER SOURCE: "he told me himself, but this was not brought out in evidence, that he had very bad dreams and had seen heaven opened and had heard the voice of God, but, he added, he knew it was only dreaming." William experienced visions -- heaven opened, the voice of God -- which he himself recognised, even at the time, as dreams. This never came out at trial. This is the most important undiscovered psychiatric detail in the project to date. Belongs centrally in Part Three, and arguably should inform how William's interior state is rendered (with extreme care and restraint) in Part One/Two.

KEY: Savage's cross-examination was actively restricted by the court: "Counsel were not allowed to ask what my opinion was of the sanity of a man who had behaved as the prisoner had, and so my evidence was reduced to the very bald statement that at the time I saw the man he was not a marked case of insanity." This explains why Savage's trial testimony reads as so hedged in the Old Bailey transcript -- the court itself prevented him from giving his full opinion, not (or not only) professional caution on Savage's part.

KEY: Justice Day's conduct from Savage's own account: "the judge ridiculed the notion of bringing in second cousins, and even threw doubt upon my bona fides." Day did not merely apply a narrow legal standard -- he actively mocked the genetic/hereditary argument in open court and impugned Savage's professional integrity. Significant for Part Three's portrait of Day.

KEY: Confirms double hernia (matches Bennett Gouldstone's "rupture" testimony) and severe headaches.

KEY: Family insanity specifics, Savage's own account: "His mother is insane, and was said to have been insane when he was born; his mother's sister also is a chronic lunatic, with suicidal inclinations and ideas of ruin impending." This identifies the "aunt" referenced in the BMJ 6 October piece as specifically the MOTHER'S SISTER, with "ideas of ruin impending" -- closely matching the trial testimony of Dr Sunderland regarding the mother's own fear that her husband "will fail in business" and "they will be turned out into the streets." The mother and her sister apparently shared near-identical delusional content around financial ruin.

KEY: "On his father's side evidence of one second cousin being insane was given" -- confirms this is the Brentford Lunatic Asylum cousin (named Charles Gouldstone's testimony at trial, soldier, died in confinement).

KEY: Savage's final diagnosis, in his own words: "a feeble minded, rather weakly, good man, who did his mechanical work well, and went home to his family. Anxiety about his increasing family at once developed the latent weakness, and he feared ruin, just as so many lunatics do, and took an insane way to get out of the trouble." This is Savage's clearest, most complete statement of his actual clinical opinion -- far more direct than anything he was permitted to say on the stand.

KEY CLOSING LINE: "If this man is hanged, I think it will be a scandal to law, or rather justice." Strong, direct language from Savage, written the day of the verdict.

This letter, combined with Wood's Times letter (19 Sept) and the Western Daily Press workmen's letter (18 Sept), establishes that Savage was the central, driving voice of the medical campaign against the verdict from the very first day.
