Source image: Morning Post article.jpeg
Newspaper/title if visible: Morning Post
Date if visible: [not visible]
Page/column/article if known: Article headed “THE WALTHAMSTOW TRAGEDY.”
Transcription scope: Visible article text in the supplied image.
Transcription status: Verified

TRANSCRIPTION

THE WALTHAMSTOW TRAGEDY.

VERDICT OF WILFUL MURDER.

At the Lodge of the Walthamstow Cemetery yesterday afternoon, Mr. Charles Carne Lewis, the coroner for the southern division of the county of Essex, resumed the inquiry into the circumstances attending the death of Charles Gouldstone, aged three years and a half, Herbert Gouldstone, aged two years and a half, Frederick Gouldstone, aged 16 months, and two infants, male twins, unnamed, who were murdered by their father, William Gouldstone, at 8, Courtenay-place, St. James’s-street, Walthamstow, on Wednesday night, the 8th inst., and with reference to whose death Gouldstone is now under remand at the Stratford Petty Sessions.

On the last occasion three witnesses were called—Mrs. Ada Hamilton, who had been nursing Gouldstone’s wife in her confinement on August 1; Mrs. E. Clark, the landlady of the house, 8, Courtenay-place, St. James’s-street; and Police-constable Cheesman, 86 N, stationed at Lea-bridge-road.

When the court had been constituted, Dr. Lyle, who has been in attendance on Mrs. Gouldstone, handed in a letter to the coroner, which he desired should be read by Mr. Lewis. The doctor read it himself, it being to the effect that one of the jury had gone to the house of Mrs. Gouldstone and had, while there, used language of a most indiscreet nature, telling her it was no use further to screen her husband, as the jury had made up their minds on the subject and he would be hanged. Before this visit the patient was progressing satisfactorily, but since she was in a much worse state. The doctor desired to enter his most indignant protest.

The coroner said that he and the jury could not be held responsible for whatever one of the jury individually did.

One of the jurymen, Mr. Blyth, said that he was the person referred to. He had, as he intimated on Friday, not time to go to the house, so he went in his leisure time on the Sunday morning.

He was asked if he had used any of the observations spoken of and he admitted that he had. Some further remarks were made by the coroner and jury, and the subject dropped.

Police-sergeant Smith, 410 N, said that at six o’clock on Wednesday evening last, from information received, he went to No. 8, Courtenay-place, St. James’s-street. He continued—I there saw the five bodies that have been shown to the jury—Charles, Herbert, Frederick, and the two infants. Particulars having been taken by the inspector and the doctor having examined them, Charles, Herbert, and Frederick, who were dead, were at once removed to the mortuary under my directions. The two infants, not then dead, remained till next morning.

Police-sergeant Bryan, 42 N, said—From directions from Inspector Craggs, on Thursday morning last I went to No. 8, Courtenay-place, and removed the two infants, after they had been seen by the doctor, to the mortuary.

Inspector Folkard, of the N Division, said—At six o’clock on Wednesday, the 8th inst., I was at Lea-bridge-road Police-station, when Police-constable Cheesman brought William Gouldstone in. Cheesman said, “This is a charge of murder. This man has murdered his five children.” The prisoner said, “That is right, sir. I did it; now I am happy. I did it like a man, too.” I later on took the doctor (Dr. Gould) to the house, and found Charles Gouldstone, Herbert, and Frederick dead, on the floor in the kitchen. One of them, the eldest, was undressed.

The coroner—Who undressed it?

Police-sergeant Smith—The doctor and the constable, thinking it was alive.

Examination continued.—I found the twins on a bed in Mrs. Hamilton’s room on the same floor. The bodies were taken to the mortuary by Sergeant Smith, and I returned to the station and booked the charge against the prisoner. He said “Quite right, sir. How is the missis? I suppose some of you gentlemen have been around to the house.” The doctor said “Tolerable.” Prisoner asked “Are the two young ones dead?” I told him “No.” At 8.30 or 9 on the 9th I told him he would be further charged with murdering the two other children. He replied “Yes, sir. The two other children are dead then?” I said “Yes.”

Mr. Henry Gould, surgeon, of Lea-bridge-road, the divisional surgeon for the police, said—On Wednesday night, the 8th inst., at about six o’clock, I was called by Inspector Folkard, and accompanied him to the house, 8, Courtenay-place, St. James’s-street. On entering the house I immediately went into the front upper room and saw lying upon the bed the twin children, said to be seven days old. They were both in a comatose condition and breathing in a spasmodic and irregular way. On examining them I found that the right side of the face and head of one was very much bruised and blackened, and I could feel the skull beneath was fractured. The back of the head of the other one was much contused and swollen, and I could feel that the skull of that one was fractured also. Blood and froth were oozing from the mouth and nose of the first one. I observed no other injuries about them; they were not dead. I then went into the kitchen, and saw there three children, all lying in a row on their backs about the centre of the floor. They were all dead, and from their clothes, which were wet, they appeared to have been in water. I saw no other marks of violence about the two younger of the three, but there was on the elder an indentation mark around the neck apparently caused by a cord or some stout string. Shortly after eight o’clock, while at the police-station, I received information that one of the infants had died, upon which I went to No. 8, Courtenay-place. At 7.10 a.m. the following day I visited the house again, and found that the other infant had died. I made the post-mortem examination on Thursday, the 9th inst., at 3.40 p.m., of all the five children. Witness then detailed at length the notes of his post-mortem examination, and from the results he was of opinion that the first male infant died from an injury to the brain caused by a violent blow; the second male infant succumbed from a similar cause. The other three children died from drowning. He was of opinion that the cord or stout string that had been tied around the elder lad’s neck, causing an indentation, had not been tied tight enough to cause death of itself.

This was the whole of the evidence, and

The coroner summed up the case at great length, remarking that it was, as he had said when he first addressed them, a most heartless and cruel one. If the jury found that the three eldest children had died from the drowning cause by their father, and if they found that the two infants died from violence at his hands, then it was their duty to return a verdict of wilful murder against the man Gouldstone. The question of insanity they had nothing to do with, for that was a subject for another tribunal to deal with.

The jury then, without hesitation, returned a verdict of wilful murder against William Gouldstone; and subsequently they signed five verdicts to that effect.

Yesterday, at noon, the funeral of the five children took place at the Walthamstow Cemetery, the service being performed by the Rev. T. H. Grantham Robson, vicar of St. Saviour’s, Walthamstow. The funeral had been arranged to take place at three o’clock in the afternoon, but the time was subsequently altered to noon. At that hour several hundred people had assembled to see the little ones put into their last resting-place. They were all placed into a 10-foot grave in the third-class portion of the cemetery, the five coffins being made of elm. At three o’clock the grave used for the five children was filled up, and it was soon after covered with flowers and descriptions, which visitors had brought with them.

