Source: Old Bailey Proceedings Online, trial of JAMES COLE, t18831015-964, sessions of 15 October 1883.
URL: https://www.oldbaileyonline.org/record/t18831015-964
Obtained: pasted from the website by Rik, 30 September 2026 (the site refuses automated access). Text as supplied, unaltered below the line.
Transcription status: website text, not checked against a page image of the printed Sessions Papers.

---

Text type	Trial account
Defendants	JAMES COLE
Offences	Killing > Murder
Session Date	15th October 1883
Reference Number	t18831015-964
Verdicts	Guilty
Punishments	Death
Related Material	
Digital Panopticon James Cole b. 1846, 4 records
Navigation	< Previous section (Trial account) | Next section (Trial account) >
964. JAMES COLE (37) was indicted for the wilful murder of Thomas Cole. He was also charged on the Coroner's Inquisition with the like murder.

MESSRS. POLAND and MONTAGU WILLIAMS Prosecuted; MR. GEOGHEGAN Defended.

RICHARD COLE . I live at Pridham Road, West Croydon—I am about 14 years of age; the prisoner is my father—in August last I was living with him and my mother at Croydon—I had a little brother named Thomas, who lived with us—he was three years and about eight months old—we had four rooms where we lived, the street-door opened from the road directly into one of the rooms—my father is a brickmaker and

labourer—he had been out of work for some time—mother used to work mending chairs, and I used to assist her—on Sunday, the 19th of August, I went out about 10 o'clock in the morning and came home about 7 o'clock at night—my mother and father were in the front room downstairs when I came home, my little brother was having his tea in the same room with them; they were having their tea—after my father had had his tea he undressed my little brother and put him to bed—when he was in bed mother and father went to bed too—father went to bed first—before they went to bed they had been quarrelling—father said "I will give you something for putting people on to me, putting people in the cupboards, and for putting men under the stairs and putting men in the cupboard to tease me, and trying to poison me"—after that they went to bed quietly—mother didn't say anything to him—he woke up in about an hour and screamed out; he made a noise like a squeak—mother sat up and held him down—then he said "Hark, can't you hear it?"—she said "No"—then he said "There, can't you hear it now?" and then she said "Yes, I can hear it"—she said that to quiet him; then she got up and went out of the house—before she went she said to him "I am frightened to stop in the house with you"—I was in the same room with them at this time—I was not in bed, my bed is upstairs—my little brother was in bed and asleep in the same bed as my father—father told me to go outside and tell my mother to come in—he was just getting up then—he had get his trousers and waistcoat on—he had taken them off and put them on again—I went out and saw my mother and she came in—that was about half-past nine—I did not go back—I saw from where I was what my father was doing—I was between our gate and Mrs. Harding's gate, that was next door—I came back with my mother, and I saw my father with my little brother by the legs; he was in the front room below, not in the bedroom—he was holding my brother by both legs, with his head down—he had one hand hold of each leg—my mother screamed and said "Oh, Jim, what are you doing?" and she pushed him away from my little brother, and got hold of my brother and laid him down on the bed—she then went to the door and began crying—father sat down on a chair, he didn't say anything—then she heard a noise like something thumping on the floor—I heard it too—we both stood at the door, father was then sitting down—I had left him sitting down—the thumping was a noise as if somebody was being knocked on the floor once, and I saw it—it was the child's head—my mother ran and stood at the door—he hit my little brother once more on the floor—he had got hold of him by his heels with his head hanging down—he had him with both hands, and hit him once more on the floor—he threw him over his shoulder and his head hit on the floor—he dashed it on the floor—he did it so (describing)—it was the right side of the head that struck the floor—that was done twice—I heard it once, and saw it once—then my mother screamed out "Murder," and Mr. Gilbert came to the door and pulled my father out—the child was then lying on the floor, he had dropped it—my mother picked the child up and ran with it to Mrs. Harding—father ran out of the door up the road as fast as he could run, and Mr. Gilbert after him—they turned the corner, and I saw no more of them—I went into Mrs. Harding's and saw my mother and the baby there—his little eyes were cut all round and a little black—I saw no more of my father that night—I did not hear my father say anything to my mother about the baby on the previous day, or at any time before.

Cross-examined. My father usually called the baby Tom, he kissed him when he undressed him at night—he always appeared very fond of him—when mother took the baby away from him the first time he let her take it at once—when he ran away he had no hat, coat, or boots on—there were no men in the cupboard or under the floor—that was not the first time I had heard him say things like that—he has accused my mother of trying to poison him, he has said that people followed him about with a knife to kill him—I have heard him cry out in the middle of the night and say that people were in the house, and were trying to kill him—he would frequently scream out in the night for no reason—I remember his coming home once and telling mother that he could not get work because people used to mock him so—he said that people used to follow him about and mock him—he used to bring home bits of paper and say that people used to be writing about him to the newspaper, and he could not stand it any longer—he said he was sure people were going to poison him, because he had pains in his stomach—I did not know my uncles—my father had been out of work for some time—he was anxious to get work, and was cross because he could not get work—we were very poor.

By the COURT. The room in which I saw the baby swung round by my father was the same room in which father and mother went to bed; it was on the ground floor, next to the street.

By MR. GEOGHEGAN. I know that my father actually searched the cupboard on that day, and went under the stairs to see if there were men there—I saw him do so.

By the COURT. I was examined before the Coroner as well as before the Magistrate—he might have said something to my mother while I was out—I did hear him say something about taking her fife, and calling her a name; that was that same evening he said "You b—f—cow, I will take your life away," because he said people followed him about, and people were in the cupboard and keeping him without food—he said that he would take her life away before the night was out for keeping him without food all day—we had been scarce of food that day, mother had not been able to get any—I said before the Coroner that there was some filthy talk between them—that was something different to what I said just now—he said that she put men on to him, and that she had been naughty with other men; there was no foundation for that at all—mother had not behaved ill—father had sometimes said that he would not look for work; at other times he seemed sorry that he could not get work—I am sure that he did not say anything about the baby that day or the previous day—he said that he would take any little child's life away if mother went into the workhouse; he didn't say exactly our baby; he said any one else's, any child he got hold of—he said the first one he got hold of—he said if it was a little innocent he would take its life away—he said he would take any innocent child's life away; that was what I said before the Coroner—what I said before the Coroner was, "If you go into the workhouse I will kill a dear innocent baby"—he didn't say our baby—I didn't say that he did—he said that he would kill any dear little innocent to leave something on her mind—he said somebody else's child—my deposition was read over, and I signed it (The witness's deposition being read stated the words to be "If you go into the workhouse I will kill the dear innocent baby to leave something on your mind.") I did not say "The dear innocent baby;" I said "A dear innocent baby."

ROBERT GILBERT . I am a carpenter, and live at I, Pridham Road, west

Croydon—on Sunday night, 19th August, I was coming up the Pridham Road, some woman stopped me, and my attention was attracted by cries of "Murder!" proceeding from the direction of the prisoner's house—I at once rushed to the front of the house, and I saw the prisoner having hold of the legs of a child in the action of throwing it against the wall—I was looking through the doorway; the door was open—he had the child by its legs in the action of swinging it against the wall—it might have touched the floor at the same time, I can't say—the head hit the wall, that I saw—the boy was standing in the front garden—Mrs. Cole was struggling with the prisoner in the front room; she had hold of him; I could not say in what way—the child went on to the floor—I could not see whether she took it up—I took hold of the prisoner and pulled him outside the front door—he struggled with me, and as we struggled I struck him a blow; he twisted round, and got away from me, and ran up to Mr. Knight—I did not hear what he said to Knight—I did not see him taken into custody—I went back to the house, the child was then in Mrs. Harding's—the prisoner seemed sober.

Cross-examined. He had no boots, coat, or hat on.

HARRIET HARDING. I am the wife of Richard Harding, of 11, Pridham Road West, next door to the prisoner's—on Sunday, 19th August, about 20 minutes past 10, I was standing at my door—I have known the prisoner, his wife, and children for some time—when I was standing there I saw the prisoner—I heard him when his wife went in, but I did not hear him before—I could not understand the words he said; he was mumbling to his wife—I heard her say to him "Good God, Jim, what are you doing of? you have got my dear baby by the heels, as if you were going to dash its little brains out"—I never heard him make any answer—nothing more was said for a little time—a little while afterwards I heard her say "Oh, he has murdered my baby," and I saw Gilbert pull the prisoner out of his gate by the back of his neck—Mrs. Cole was inside—I then went in and was going to pick the child up at the same time as Mrs. Cole, but I drew my hands back, as she was the mother—I saw her take it up—we could not tell whether it was alive or not till I got it into my house, because it was dark—it was lying lifeless like; it did not cry at all—I saw that it was bleeding when I got it in my house—I washed it and attended to it till its death—the doctor came and saw it; it was quite senseless—I sat up all night with it, me and my mother; it remained senseless—it had convulsion fits for about two hours, it might be more—it died about 25 minutes past 7 the following morning—I had not known the child very long—the woman came to live by the side of me about three months, that was how I knew it—it used to play out in the street along with my children—it was playing out on the Sunday; it was all right on the Sunday afternoon—that was the last time I saw it, out in the back yard—on the night before this occurred I heard the wife say in the prisoner's presence "What am I to do? I have been to bed and I am obliged to get up, and the language is dreadful; if I go upstairs you are after me, if I go back into the back yard you are after me, and what am I to do?"—I had heard bad language used by him throughout the day—he called his wife a "b—f—mare" and a "b—f—cow," and such words as that, bad names, as if she had been a bad woman—I did not know enough of them to know if there was any foundation for that—I believe the woman to be a very respectable woman as far as I have known her, and I have known her a good many years

work hard for a living and try her best for her family when he has been away from her, and when he has been at home she has done her utmost—I sever saw her intoxicated—I never saw any signs of her being unfaithful to him, not the slightest—there was nobody in the house except herself, her husband, and their family—she kept to herself—if he thought she was treating him badly as a wife he was altogether mistaken, as far as I saw—I never heard him charge her with having men in the house—when she said this about having been to bed she was crying, and she said she supposed she should have to stop there all night—I had spoken to him that afternoon about his bad language—he had been using bad language out in the back yard—I told him he ought to know better than to call a woman such dreadful names, and it was not right—he told me to mind my own business, and sooner than a woman should do as she liked, he would sooner settle the lot—I should think it was about 4 o'clock in the afternoon when he said that; he was out in the back yard calling his wife bad names—I had heard him at other times, but not seen him—I could hear them in the house when he was at home—he was not a quiet man—I heard quarrelling the whole of Sunday and I heard the little dear say "Don't cry, don't cry, mamma, I cry too"—those were the last words I heard the little dear say to the mother.

Cross-examined. What he said was "Rather than they should do as they like I would settle the lot"—I don't know that he used to fall into fearful passions without any reason—I know he is a very passionate man, for what reason I don't know—he was not very violent without cause—I was examined before the Mayor at Croydon—I might have said then "I believe him often to be violent without any cause"—I believe he was very passionate, and I don't believe he had any reason to be passionate with his wife—he did fall into passions—his wife has been to my knowledge and to the knowledge of the neighbours a hard-working woman and a faithful wife—if he had an idea of her being unfaithful it was pure delusion on his part—it might have been an interval of 10 minutes between the time of her saying "He is holding my baby by the legs" and her saying "He is murdering my baby."

THOMAS KNIGHT . I am a brickmaker and live at Holloway Road, Thornton Heath—I have known the prisoner about 14 years—on this Sunday night, about half-past 10, I was going down a road near the prisoner's house and saw him running up the road towards me—he said "I have murdered my child"—I had stopped him when I saw him running; I ran after him—I told him I should take him to a policeman, and I kept him till a policeman came—he was sober—he went quietly with the constable.

Cross-examined. He ran straight up to me at first—I had caught hold of him when he said "I have murdered my child"—he did not struggle at all—he had run about 12 yards before I caught him—I have known him 14 years—I don't know whether he has been out of work recently—sometimes I have not seen him for 12 months, sometimes not for six months.

By the COURT. At first he was running towards me, and he went on running in the same direction, and as he was passing me he said "I have murdered my child," and I ran alter him and caught him.

WILLIAM MORTON (Policeman W 124). On Sunday night, 19th August, I saw the witness Knight holding the prisoner—Knight said that he saw the prisoner running up the road, that he heard cries of "Murder!"

and stopped him—I told him I should take him to the station on that charge till I had made further inquiry—he said "Don't get hold of me; I won't give you any trouble, I will go quietly"—he went quietly to the station—he was sober.

ROBERT BUTTERS (Police Inspector). I was sent for to the station when the prisoner was there—I went to the house and made inquiries—he was then charged with attempting to murder his son Thomas—the charge was read over to him; he made no reply—he was sober—next morning I heard that the child was dead—he was then charged with murdering the child—he made no reply then—I went to the prisoner's house on the Sunday night—there is a little garden in front; the gate is about eight feet from the door of the house, which opens into the road—the house was very poorly furnished; there was an old mattress on the floor—I saw one of the prisoner's boots lying at the foot of the mattress—there were no chairs—there was a shutter on bricks to make a place to sit down upon—about four inches from the boot there was a small quantity of blood on the floor, about the size of a crown piece.

Cross-examined. The walls are painted right down to the floor—there were no marks on them—I examined them thoroughly and saw no marks—a person passing down the street could see into the room.

MARTIN JACKSON . I am a registered medical practitioner—on Sunday night, 19th August, I was sent for to Mrs. Harding's; I got there about 11.10—I found the child there; it was unconscious, breathing quietly—there was a large bruise on the right side of the face, extending down to the cheek and up to the skull—on the right eye there was a small cut at the outer side—there was a bruise of the upper eyelid—the wound was a small one, bleeding just slightly—those were all the marks on the face and head—on the forearm there was a bruise, on the right forearm, and another on the front of the arm, and another small bruise on the left forearm—on the belly, the right side, and the side, there were streaks of dust, probably from the floor—there was a good deal of swelling, both on the head and face—there were no marks on the legs; I looked very carefully for marks on the legs, but found none—the child was unconscious, and died in about an hour and a half—it had no convulsions when I saw it first—I came back about 1 o'clock and remained with it till about 2.15, when it had convulsions and was sick and vomited some food; it remained unconscious all the time—I culled at 8 o'clock next morning and found it had just died—nothing more could have been done for it I think than was done—I made a post-mortem examination—the skull was not fractured—the cause of death in my judgment was concussion—if the child had come in contact with some plain hard substance, that would account for what I saw.

By the COURT. If it had been swung round by the legs and its head dashed against the wall or floor, that would account for what I saw and for the death—the child was fairly nourished.

Cross-examined. The flesh of a child of that age would be very tender and very susceptible to a bruise; that was the reason why I looked at the legs—if a full-grown, strong man were to grasp a child round the ankles I should expect to find marks, and for that reason I looked—it would depend on the amount of force with which it was caught round there.

OLIVER TERENOE TREADWELL . I am assistant surgeon to Her Majesty's

Prison, Clerkenwell—the prisoner has been in that prison since 20th August last—I knew what the charge was against him—I have seen him frequently from time to time, and have talked to him and examined him—during the whole of that time in my judgment he was a man of sound mind and understanding—I saw him first on 21st August, and last yesterday—on the evening of 15th September he was violent; I saw him on that occasion and I had him removed to the padded cell—in my opinion on that occasion he was sane—I know of no cause for his violence on that occasion—he was kept in the padded cell till the morning of the 17th.

By the COURT. I saw the violence—I was passing his cell door, and heard a row in the cell—the prisoner was sitting up in bed with a pillow in his hands, which he was apparently going to throw at me—I called two warders—there was no violence, no row except the row which preceded me—that was something thrown at the door in the cell; not more than once—I saw him in the padded cell before I left the prison; he was then quite quiet; he did not throw the pillow at me; he was apparently going to do so—he did not say anything, he did not speak at all—the following morning he said he was sorry for what he had done, and wished to be removed from the padded cell—I did not have him removed—he was seen by my colleague on the following morning, and he was removed on the following morning.

Cross-examined. It was about half-past 8—I visit the prison every day; there are two of us, and we visit from 20 to 30 between us, not more I should think, generally between the hours of 10 and 1—the prisoner could hear me walking down the corridor in the evening—I think it was a can that he threw at the door—I asked him why he did it, but he did not answer—there were two warders with me—he did not speak to them while I was with them—he struggled a little against going to the padded cell—he was led by two warders—I have spoken to him in his cell—he obeyed the prison regulations—that is not one of the reasons why I think he is saue—he has not presented any symptoms, not any delusions—I have spoken to him on several topics—I have spoken to him for instance with regard to his imagining poison in his food—that was from information I had received from my colleague—he is not here to-day—I have asked him whether he heard voices in the air in the prison—that was not in consequence of anything my colleague told me, it was a question of my own, suggested to myself—my colleague had heard that he had suffered from the delusion about the poison, and I questioned him upon that matter—he knew I was the doctor attached to the prison—he had never presented these delusions in the prison—when I spoke to him about hearing noises, he said he used to think that he heard noises, and he used to search about the place to see if he could find any one—he spoke about people under the floor—I don't know that he said under the floor; he told me that he searched in the cupboard and under the bed in his own house for people he thought were there—he gave me no reason or idea why they were to come to his house; he did not seem to know—I don't think he ever told me that his wife was unfaithful—saying that people were in the cupboard and under the floor is not the remark of a sane man; I asked him in the prison if he thought so, and he said he did not—the same remark would apply to the poison—before he came into

the prison he was under the impression that people were trying to poison him—all I speak to as to his sanity is when he was in the prison.

Re-examined What I heard about the poison was what I heard outside the prison—he told me he used to think so—that was quite recently.

JOHN MOORE . I am chief warder of Her Majesty's Prison, Clerkenwell—I have seen the prisoner I may say daily since he came in on 20th August last—I have spoken to him from time to time, mostly daily, sometimes several times in a day, with the exception of 15th September, when he was violent—on all other occasions he appeared to be a sane man, as quiet and inoffensive a man as you would wish to have in the prison—like the other prisoners, he conformed strictly to the prison rules and conducted himself in a rational way—on 30th September, when he was violent, I saw him a short time after the occurrence—he was then apparently asleep.

Cross-examined. This is not the first time he has been in custody; he has been in on several occasions—he would know the routine of the prison—it was partly because he conformed to the rules that I considered that he was sane—I have never been over Broadmoor—I have had a great many lunatics under my charge in asylums—as chief warder I simply go round and visit the prisoners; I do not simply put in my head and say "Good morning"—I go in and take note of any application that they may wish to make—I ask if they have anything to complain of—I don't suppose that my conversation with the prisoner was at any time more than a minute or two in length, it was simply as a matter of duty—I never spoke to him about voices in the air, or anything of that sort; I left him in the hands of the doctor—I have not heard of his being unable to sleep, he has always been reported to we by the night officer as having slept well.

WILLIAM HENRY LONG GILBERT . I am chaplain of Wandsworth Prison, and have been so for the last 16 years—I have known the prisoner on and off for about two years, my memory does not go back farther than that—I have seen him on and off when he has been in the prison as a matter of course when he comes in and also when he is discharged—the last time was on 24th August this year; he was discharged on the 25th—on those occasions when I saw him I should say that he was of perfectly sound mind and understanding—Dr. Winter, the medical officer, is on sick leave.

Cross-examined. I am not aware that a convict of the name of Gouldstone was under my care—I do not visit all the prisoners daily, that would be impossible—I and my colleague visit them as we can, it depends whether they are under a long or short sentence; probably if a prisoner was there for 18 months we should see him once a fortnight—the questions between us would not be purely religious—there is a library attached to the prison, and we determine what books the prisoners may have and what not—I have no idea of this man's reading—I think his sentences were very short—if a man was there seven days I should see him when he came in and when he came out—a six months' man I should see probably three or four times, and probably my colleague would see him the same number of times—perhaps each visit would be a quarter of an hour—upon the topics of which the prisoner spoke I considered him sane—the subjects of his delusions were not mentioned to me at all.

CHARLES JAMES HENRY SMTH . I live at 7, Durham Terrace, Westbourne Park—I am a B.A. and M.R.C.S.—in May, 1879, I was parish surgeon at South Norwood—I attended the prisoner's wife about 31st May—she asked me to see her husband; I cannot recollect the precise tools she used, but it was to the effect that she was afraid of him—I did see him; I found no symptoms of insanity about him at that time—I only saw him on that occasion, and only for a few minutes, five or ten minutes, I cannot recollect precisely—he was not sober, he was suffering from the effects of drink; that is as far as I can recollect, I cannot say more—I saw him again on 23rd August in the same year, two or three times, 'I think; that was by an order by the parish—on those occasions I saw no symptoms of insanity about him.

Cross-examined. I do not recollect on one occasion taking from him a heavy iron boot—I may have stated that I took from him a heavy iron boot which he had seized in order to defend himself from persons who he thought were going to injure him; I don't recollect it; my mind is an entire blank on the subject—when I send a person to the workhouse infirmary I send a certificate; we are bound to do so—I cannot recollect certifying this man's disease to be mental—it is four years and a half ago since the events occurred, and I see so many patients that it is impossible to recollect—I have recollected the dates because I have looked them up in my private books—I recollect the fact of my sending him to the work-house infirmary because he was violent and his wife was frightened of him, but these symptoms were the result of drink, not insanity—I am perfectly sure that I then formed a judgment that he was not labouring under insanity—I remember enough to say that—I might have told his wife that he was wrong in the Road—I might have signed the certificate that the disease was mental—I didn't do so on the second occasion in July; I am sure of that—it was because he was violent that I sent him to the infirmary; for this reason, from his poor circumstances he could not afford to have anyone to look after him, and his wife was in bed ill, and in danger that in his violence he might do something—it was not a case that I could have sent to an asylum because I did not consider him insane—I did not inform the police, because I found that when I did inform the police they would not take any action in the matter—I cannot say that his wife said that she went in fear of her life; she said she was frightened of him; she might have said that she went in bodily fear of him, I cannot say—I do not live near Croydom; I am in London now—I didn't hear while I was in Croydon that the prisoner fancied that people were trying to poison him—his wife didn't speak to me about it, or that people were trying to injure him—I cannot swear that I never took a boot from him, but I don't recollect it—he never told me to my knowledge that people were going about seeking to injure him—the two occasions I have spoken of lour years and a half, ago were the only two occasions on which I saw him.

The following Witnesses were called for the Defence:

CHARLES COLE . I live at Highfield, Southampton—I am brother of of the prisoner—my mother is living; she is over 80 years of age—I remember my uncles—John Cole was a butler; the other uncle was named James Cole—John Cole was in service—I never went to see him while he was in service nor afterwards; I didn't see him anywhere afterwards;

he was taken ill and died shortly after—I used to see Uncle James; he used to be postman at Southampton and the country villages round about—I remember his death; I was not in Southampton when he died, I was at Shirley—I went to Southampton after his death—he was taken ill and wandered away and was drowned in a state of insanity—I knew Richard Sharman, my first cousin, and George Meisselthwaithe; he was a first cousin too; I never went to see them; my elder brother went to see them—he is not here—there is no one here who has seen them—I can make a little statement about my father; he died in a fit; I cannot tell you his age—it is a very long time ago, when my brother was an infant—my grandfather died in a fit and my grandmother died in a fit, and my elder brother was sent about with my father for years, because he was not safe to go about himself; I know that of my own knowledge—the prisoner has spoken to me about delusions—at one time about twenty years ago or more I met him in the street and he did not know me—I have only seen him once since twelve years ago, when he wandered away from our home and we had no idea where he had gone to—I have not seen, him since then till now.

Cross-examined. I have known the prisoner to have been excited very much—he did not know what he was doing very often.

By the COURT. I never knew him to drink, any more than a drop of ale in his work.

DR. THOMAS JACKSON . I am a M.R.C.S. and L.R.C.P., and am one of the Aldermen for the Borough of Croydon—Dr. Mark Jackon is my brother—during the last 18 months I have visited Bethlehem Hospital constantly—I first saw the prisoner on Tuesday last in Clerkenwell House of Detention—I was with him about three-quarters of an hour—I conversed with him all the time, perhaps about a thousand and one topics.

Q. What impression did that interview leave on your mind as to his sanity?—A. I am quite certain that he is a typical lunatic, with dangerous delusions; those delusions have been of long standing; he has also illusions—that is, he hears noises, and has done for years past; and if one may accept his own testimony, he suffers, and has done for many years, from sleeplessness, and pains in his head and pains in his stomach.

Cross-examined. Mr. Morgan, one of the surgeons of the prison, was present when I saw the prisoner—I wished to see him with Dr. Treadwell—I wrote to him to meet me, and he wrote to say that either he or Dr Morgan would meet me—Dr. Morgan sat at the table and I examined the prisoner in his presence and one of the warder's—I did not tell him that I was his friend, I told him that I was a doctor—I did not tell him that I had come to examine him as to the state of his mind; I told him I was a friend of his wife's and that I had come to see him—I gave him no leading questions. Q. Apart from these delusions, if he were a free man now, have you any doubt that he would be able to get his living and conduct himself as a sane man?—A. He could not, and no parish doctor ought to allow him at large; I don't think he could get his living by work and conduct himself as a sane man; he might for a time, for a week, or it might be longer, but he would find himself physically incapable I believe at the present moment; I don't think he would have the strength, he is in a depressed nervous condition in every respect—he quite understood all I said to him, and gave rational answers to my questions, as they nearly always do in that state of mind.

By the COURT. I have no note of what I asked him and what he said—I did not take any note in my interview with him, I did of previous inquiries which I had made of his friends-what passed between me and him is fresh in my memory—I did not ask him a word about his trial—I wanted to get at the question about poisoning—I asked him first "Has any one tried to injure you?"—he said "I have thought so"—"Has any one ever tried to hang you?"—"No"—"Has any one ever tried to out your throat?"—"No"—"Has any one tried to drown you or to throw you into a pond?"—"No"—"Has any one ever tried to poison you?"—"I have thought so"—"When?"—"A good many times"—"Has it ever been since you have been in the prison?"—"No"—"When was it"—"Well, many times when I have been at home; I have many times sent my wife out of the room and changed the cup of tea and taken hers and given her mine"—I said "Why did you do that?"—he said "Because I was afraid she was trying to poison me"—I said "Did you really believe it?"—he said "I could not believe she could, but I used to fancy so"—I said "What made you think that?"—"Because I used to think she was setting men to follow me wherever I went, and that she used to pinch me in the bed"—and in the night I found that he had a typical fit, one of those frightful fits the boy has spoken of; that he would shout out—he told me this, that he used to wake up and fancy some one was murdering him, and then I got a description from himself corresponding exactly with what I had got from his wife; he would tremble all over and then break out into a furious state of perspiration—he also said that people were writing in the newspapers about him—he did not say that he believed all this in the gaol, but that he had at one time thought so; he also said that he had searched the cupboard on the very Sunday of the murder, but his mind was really a blank as to the after part of the day, even as to bruising the child and tossing it; he could not remember anything of that—then he had these pains in his stomach, and he used to think that was due to the poison—he said that his food was being drugged—he had only been out of prison three weeks, and he said he felt so prostrate that he could not do work, and when he did seek for work people often mocked him, and set themselves, as he put it, against him—he said he used to think so—I did not lead him by questions, because I have no interests in this matter but those of justice.

By MR. POLAND. I think I have stated the main facts—he acknowledged that he drank occasionally, but he told me that if he drank now, even a pint, and sometimes half a pint, he lost his senses in a moment and did not know where he was or what he was doing—he told me that he had been in prison over and over again for violence, he did not say for drunkenness—I asked him what it was for—he said on one occasion his wife was feeding one of the children and he thought she was about doing something against him, and he hit her with the spoon and cracked her skull, and she is insensible along that side of the head at the present moment, for I have examined her—he told me he was in prison for violence, he did not tell me it was for drunkenness; I don't know what he was in for—he told me he had been drunk; I don't know that he used the expression, "over and over again"—I don't remember the expression that he had been a hard drinker for years—I said, "I suppose you get drunk occasionally?"—he said, "Yes,

but I find now that a very little makes me lose my senses in a moment"—everything he told me corroborated all I had heard from the neighbours, his wife, and family—I took the case up because I felt what it was from the first moment I was called to the child—his wife was in such a passion with him, and so were the neighbours, that I took the opportunity to make notes, and I felt sure that proper investigation would bring out the fact that his mind was not right; I felt sure that he was insane before I went to the prison; I felt thoroughly convinced that he was insane if the information given me was true, and I went to the prison to test that information—I wrote purposely for permission to have the interview with him—I did not go with a prejudiced mind; I had certain information, which I had got at great trouble—I have no doubt that he knows now that he is being tried for murder, but the insane know a great deal—I expect that he knows at this moment that the punishment following upon murder is death; I don't believe he knew it on that Sunday night—I asked him as to what he had done on that Sunday night—I said, "How could you do that act to your little child?"—he did not answer—then I said, "Did you undress Tommy that night?"—he said, "I don't know"—his wife had told me that he had undressed him and nursed him—I said, "Did you cuddle the child?" because that was the expression used—he said, "I don't remember it"—I said, "Did you nurse him?"—he said, "I don't remember, but as I generally had him on my knee when I was indoors I expect I did"—I did not ask him whether he had got into a violent passion that night—he told me that he and his wife had had high words; he thought that she then was hiding people upstairs and down in the cupboard and under the floor—I am afraid I did not ask him what they had been having words about; he told me he thought she was worrying him continually—he did not remember about the food he had that day, he could not remember what he had had for dinner or tea.

By the COURT. I asked him why he did it to the poor little fellow; I put it in that way, I did not use any expression, I did not like to use the word" murder" to him—he would not answer—I don't know what answer he would have given if I had said, "How did you destroy the life of your child?"—if I had he might have told me all about it, I cannot tell; I waited and asked him two or three times, but he said nothing—then I tried to lead him up to the question, how about the surroundings, such as his nursing it—I did not ask him any question as to why he did the act, or how, or anything of that kind, I asked him whether any one had been pursuing him that day, but I did not ask him that.

By MR. POLAND. I went to the prison with the firm conviction that the prisoner was n type of a certain form of insanity, from the investigations I had made—I would stake my reputation that he is a typically insane and dangerous man—I went to try and prevent a miscarriage of justice, and from no other motive whatever.

Re-examined. The reason I came here to-day is because I had a letter asking me to come—I say that no parish doctor ought to allow him to be abroad, because he is dangerous; if he were released to-morrow these delusions would follow him wherever he went, it is merely a matter of time—it was a matter of chance that his wife was not killed last year--of course he is better at times than at others—if he had two or three nights of continuous sleeplessness he would be dangerous—I had certain information

in my mind, and went to the prison to test the truth of it by an examination of the prisoner.

By the COURT. If he had admitted the state of things to be as I had heard, after a proper examination without any leading questions, then in my judgment he was insane at the time and not responsible for his actions—I formed my judgment beforehand on what I had heard, but went to test those facts by examining him.

GUILTY— DEATH .