THE WALTHAMSTOW MURDERS.
Pall Mall Budget, 21 September 1883

William Gouldstone (twenty-six), blacksmith, was placed at the bar of the Central Criminal Court to take his trial for the murder of his five children. Mr. Poland and Mr. Montagu Williams prosecuted on behalf of the Public Prosecutor; Mr. Grain and Mr. G. Elliott defended the prisoner. Mr. Poland opened the case for the prosecution. The learned counsel gave a brief outline of the facts of the case, which are well known. He said the prisoner, who was by trade a blacksmith, was represented as being a sober, hardworking man, and very fond of his children. The only motive that appeared to be suggested for the commission of the crimes was that the prisoner was under the impression that he should not be able to support his family, especially after his wife had been confined with twins, which had evidently preyed upon his mind. After they had heard the evidence, Mr. Poland added, he believed that the only question that would remain for the consideration of the jury was whether the prisoner was insane at the time he committed the terrible deed. Mr. Grain, for the prisoner, said that the facts could not be disputed, and the only defence that could be made was that at the time the horrible deeds were committed the prisoner was insane, and not criminally responsible. Witnesses were then examined, who proved that several members of the prisoner's family were insane, and that one or two of them had died in a lunatic asylum. One or two other relations of the prisoner, it appeared, had also attempted to commit suicide. The father of the prisoner stated that he had several other sons, but the prisoner was the only one of his children who did not seem to be right in his mind. Some fellow-workmen of the prisoner's proved that some time before the murder it was noticed that his conduct was very strange. He complained of severe pains in his head. On several occasions he threatened to commit suicide, and he had asked some of his fellow-workmen to knock his brains out with a hammer. Dr. Savage, one of the medical officers of Bethlehem Hospital, said he had examined the prisoner, and upon all the facts he was of opinion that the man was insane when he committed the murders. The jury eventually found the prisoner guilty of wilful murder, and sentence of death was passed in the usual manner. Gouldstone was afterwards taken to Chelmsford Prison. Mr. J. Oxley Parker, the High Sheriff of Essex, has, it is stated, received numerous applications from persons desirous of acting as hangman, but up to the present no definite arrangements have been made.

---
TRANSCRIPTION NOTES
Source: Pall Mall Budget, 21 September 1883
Repository image: sources/images/Media-coverage/Pall Mall Budget Sep 21 1883.png
Clean, concise summary of the trial, broadly consistent with all other trial coverage already transcribed.
KEY: New small detail -- "On several occasions he threatened to commit suicide, and he had asked some of his fellow-workmen to knock his brains out with a hammer" -- this report explicitly links the suicide threats with the hammer request as a single recurring pattern of behaviour, which is implicit but not stated quite this directly in the Old Bailey transcript (where Cakebread's hammer-request testimony and the lift/train threats are recounted somewhat separately).
KEY: Confirms High Sheriff J. Oxley Parker had already received "numerous applications from persons desirous of acting as hangman" before the reprieve was granted -- a grim period detail about public appetite for the execution, useful colour for Part Three.
