Source image: sources/images/Media-coverage/to-transcribe/The_Times_1883-08-10.jpg (3076 x 4176), page 12
Newspaper/title if visible: THE TIMES
Date if visible: FRIDAY, AUGUST 10, 1883 (running head); page 12
Page/column/article if known: first column, "THE MURDER OF FIVE CHILDREN.", from below the Royal College of
Surgeons report to the foot of the column
Transcription scope: the whole report.
Transcription status: COMPLETE. Transcribed 3 October 2026 directly from the image, every line read enlarged. This
counts as the one image check.

NOTE: the Times's report of the first Stratford hearing, Thursday 9 August (Lister in the chair, with Glenny; Ada
Hamilton the only witness; remanded to Saturday). Points against the project's notes, not yet entered anywhere:
- Ada lodging "for the last 10 weeks", given twice. Ten weeks before 9 August is about 31 May (Contradiction 58;
  Chapter Six has "the first of June 1883").
- "Yes, do my dear." with no comma after "do" (Contradiction 28 quotes "Yes, do, my dear,").
- "With that the prisoner opened the poor himself": "poor" is the paper's misprint for "door", kept as printed.
- Lister's exchange with Atkinson about cross-examining, and his words to Ada as she left the box.
- "you will be single. You wished them dead, and now they are." (compare the sworn versions).
Italics in the original (the paper's) are not marked. Press as press; for the sworn words use the depositions.

TRANSCRIPTION

THE MURDER OF FIVE CHILDREN.

At the court-house of the Half Hundred of Beacontree Division, at Stratford, yesterday, before Mr. Arthur Lister,
J.P. (in the chair), and Mr. W. W. Glenny, William Gouldstone, aged 26, described as a blacksmith, living at No. 8,
Courtney-place, St. James's-street, Walthamstow, was brought up in the custody of Inspectors Craggs and Foulkard,
of the N Division, and charged with murdering his three children—Charles, aged three years and a half; Herbert,
aged two years and a half; and Frederick, aged 16 months—by putting them into a water cistern at his residence, on
the 8th instant; and he was further charged with also murdering his two male infant children—twins, unchristened
or named—aged seven days, by striking them on the head with a hammer at the same time and place. The prisoner, a
fair man, with light hair and moustache, about 5ft. 4in. or 5ft. 5in. in height, was, when first apprehended,
charged with murdering his three children, Charles, Herbert, and Frederick, and with assaulting the two infants;
but both of the latter having since died from the injuries inflicted, he was now charged with murdering the five
children.

Mr. John W. Atkinson, solicitor, of Stratford, appeared on behalf of the prisoner.

The first witness called was Mrs. Ada Hamilton, the wife of William Hamilton, residing in the same house as the
prisoner, No. 8, Courtney-place, St. James's-street, Walthamstow. Examined by Mr. Wells, the clerk of the Court,
she said,—I am a monthly nurse, and know the prisoner. I have been acting as nurse to his wife, who was confined on
last Wednesday night week, the 1st of August, of twins, both male children. I have been residing in the house as a
lodger for the last 10 weeks. There were three other children in the family—Charles Gouldstone, 3½ years old;
Herbert Gouldstone, 2½ years old; and Frederick, aged 16 months. On Wednesday night, between 5 and 6 o'clock, I was
in Mrs. Gouldstone's bedroom, in the act of washing the two babies, when the prisoner came in from the street. I
heard him go into the kitchen. The two eldest children were at that time in the kitchen playing, and Freddy was in
the bedroom with me and his mother. When I heard the prisoner come in I went to the kitchen to see who it was, and
I said to him, "Oh, you did frighten me; I wondered who it was." He made no reply. I did not notice anything
particular about him. I went back into the bedroom and finished washing the babies, when he came into the room.
This was 10 minutes after he came indoors. He stood by his wife's bedstead, but did not speak to her. She said to
him, "How is it you are home so early?" and he replied, "I left the place while the manager had gone to dinner,
and I came home." His wife then asked him if he had told them at the shop about her confinement, and he answered
"No." With that he took the little boy Frederick off the bed and out into the kitchen.

At this point the witness seemed to be much affected.

When I had finished washing the first infant, I went into the kitchen, after I had put the babe by its mother's
side. I saw the prisoner sitting on the fireguard, the three children playing on the floor. He had a piece of
string in his hand. I have seen it since. It was similar to the piece produced now by Inspector Foulkard (a piece
of white twine such as is used by tradesmen to tie up small parcels). I asked the prisoner if he had had his tea,
and he said "No." I then told him it was ready for him, and with that I went back into the bedroom and washed the
other baby. Having done so, I put it into the bed by the side of the mother, and I then returned to the kitchen. I
passed into the washhouse beyond, and saw a chair by the cistern. The children were at this time still playing in
the kitchen. The cistern was in the washhouse, up high. The prisoner was sitting on the fireguard in the kitchen.
When I noticed the chair under the cistern, of course I did not think of anything of this sort. A perambulator had
stood there, but it had been moved out a bit. I asked who put it there, and the little boy Charley said, "Daddy
did." I took the chair back into the kitchen, and then went back to the bedroom and got Mrs. Gouldstone out of her
bed. I re-made the bed and she got into it again. Just at this time—as she was getting in the bed—the prisoner came
along the passage and looked into the room. I said, "You can come in, Mr. Gouldstone." He made some answer in a
mumbling tone which I could not hear. With that I said to Mrs. Gouldstone, "Shall I leave the room a minute?
perhaps Mr. Gouldstone wants to speak to you;" and she answered, "Yes, do my dear." With that I left the room, and
went downstairs. I heard the prisoner open the kitchen door—which was shut as I passed it—walk across the landing,
and go into the bedroom. I got to the yard door, when I heard screams of "Murder" from the prisoner's wife. I ran
upstairs and tried to open the door, she still crying "Murder" inside. I could hear no one speak but her. I heard
her saying, "Good God! he is murdering my children." I did not hear the cries of children. Being unable to open
the door, I leaned over the banisters, and called for assistance. The landlady of the house, whom I had seen in the
yard when I was there, ran towards me. We both pushed the door to try to force it open, but could not do so. With
that the prisoner opened the poor himself. I had called out to him, "Open the door." Prisoner's wife was still
crying out. When he opened the door I said, "Oh! you wicked man, what have you done?" He said, "I have killed my
children. I am a happy man now. Your other three children are in the cistern." He was then speaking to his wife. I
then went to his wife's side and saw both babies bleeding from the mouth. There were marks of violence on them. One
of the children had a bruise over one of its eyes. I examined the children, and finding they were not dead, I at
once sent for a medical man. They appeared to be dying. The prisoner went into the kitchen, and I stopped with his
wife for a few seconds. Mrs. Gouldstone said to me, "He says he has killed the other three children. Go and see,
will you?" I went into the kitchen, and saw the prisoner coming in at the kitchen door from the washhouse with the
boy Frederick in his arms, and he laid him on the floor. The child was wet. I turned back, and seeing Mrs.
Gouldstone coming out of her room along the landing, I ran back to her, as I did not want her to see the child. The
child seemed as if it had been in the water, and to be dead. I was very much frightened. I went back to the
prisoner's wife, and I did not leave her for ten minutes. When I went into the kitchen again I saw the three
children lying on the ground with a gentleman leaning over them. They were all of a row, side by side. They were
swamped with water. By this time a gentleman—a chemist—was there, and the prisoner was also in the kitchen. He said
nothing, and no one spoke to him. I saw a police-constable come afterwards, and saw the prisoner taken into
custody. Prisoner and the policeman went into the bedroom, and his wife asked him to leave all the money he had, as
she had the doctor to pay. Both the infant children were now dead; one died half an hour after the prisoner was
taken away, and the other at about 2 o'clock yesterday morning. I did not hear the prisoner charged by the police.
While in the room with his wife, the prisoner kissed her and he said, "All the children are dead now; I shall be
hanged and you will be single. You wished them dead, and now they are." He then kissed his wife. I have lived in
the house for 10 weeks, and know that the prisoner has always lived on good terms with his wife; but I noticed he
appeared strange after the twins were born. He was not unkind to the children; he seemed fond of them all; but he
had not looked at the twins. The wife is now dangerously ill in bed.

Inspector Craggs, who is in charge of the case, here said, in answer to the Bench, that he desired a remand.

Mr. Atkinson.—I should like to ask a few questions, with your permission, Sir.

Mr. Lister.—Do you really think your case will be improved by cross-examining? Now, do you not think it would be
better to reserve it?

Mr. Atkinson.—I leave it entirely in your hands, Sir.

Mr. Lister.—Then the prisoner will be remanded till Saturday, and in the meantime further inquiries will be made.

The prisoner was then removed from the dock.

As Mrs. Hamilton, the witness, was about to leave the witness box, Mr. Lister addressed her, and said she had given
her evidence well, adding that it was a painful position for her to be in.

During the hearing of the case the prisoner was apparently quite calm and collected, though he seemed careworn and
restless.
