Source image: sources/images/Media-coverage/to-transcribe/The_Times_1883-08-14.jpg (3075 x 4168), page 8
Newspaper/title if visible: THE TIMES
Date if visible: TUESDAY, AUGUST 14, 1883 (running head); page 8
Page/column/article if known: fifth column, "THE MURDER OF FIVE CHILDREN.", from about two-thirds down to the foot,
continued at the head of the sixth column to "THE MAILS."
Transcription scope: the whole report, the resumed inquest and the funeral.
Transcription status: COMPLETE. Transcribed 3 October 2026 directly from the image, every line read enlarged,
including the column break (foot of column five to head of column six). This counts as the one image check.

NOTE: the Times's report of Monday 13 August (Chapter Eleven, drafted and assembled). Press as press; for sworn
words use the depositions. Points against the project's notes, not yet entered anywhere:
- Lyle "handed in a letter to the Coroner marked 'Not private,'" and Lewis asked Lyle to read it.
- Blythe "could not say he had not" used the observations in the letter.
- "the doctor said the question was whether they would not have to view the body of Mrs. Gouldstone": so printed.
- Folkard "At 6 o'clock"; "I did it like a man too"; "How is the missus?"; "Tolerable." from "The doctor".
- Gould: the cord "had not been tied tight enough to cause death of itself".
- The funeral: "fixed to take place at 3 o'clock" and brought forward "three hours"; "Over 1,000 persons" (compare
  Contradiction 7); Mrs. Graves "in whose house at Hackney" (compare the Bethnal Green reading in the Chapter Ten
  skeleton); "the wife of one of the prisoner's uncles and her daughter"; elm coffins; third-class portion.
- "subsequently they signed five verdicts to that effect."
Small capitals ("CORONER") given as printed; "post-mortem" is italic in the original.

TRANSCRIPTION

THE MURDER OF FIVE CHILDREN.

At the Board-room of the Walthamstow Cemetery, yesterday afternoon, Mr. C. C. Lewis, the Coroner for the southern
division of Essex, resumed the adjourned inquest on the bodies of the five children of William Gouldstone, by whom
they were murdered on the 8th inst.

Before any evidence was taken yesterday Dr. Lyle, who has been attending Mrs. Gouldstone, handed in a letter to
the Coroner marked "Not private," and Mr. Lewis requested Dr. Lyle to read it. He did so and in it desired to
express his indignant protest against the conduct of one of the jurymen, Mr. Blythe, who had gone to the house,
as he alleged, and used language of a most indiscreet nature, telling Mrs. Gouldstone that it was no use for her
to screen her husband as she was doing, because the jury had made up their mind on the subject, they being
determined he should not escape. The juryman was further alleged to have said to Mrs. Gouldstone that she had
driven her husband to it through jealousy. The doctor continued that before this visit Mrs. Gouldstone was
progressing favourably, but since she had been in a much worse state.

The CORONER said the jury could not be held responsible for what one of their number individually had done. He
seemed to have acted indiscreetly. When he (the Coroner) and some of the jurymen went to the house on Friday they
took great precautions not to disturb the patient, and he dared to say that she did not know they were in the
house.

Mr. Blythe, the juryman referred to, said that perhaps it would be well for him to say a few words. As he had
intimated on Friday, he had not time to go to the house, so he went at his leisure on the Sunday morning, and did
see Mrs. Gouldstone, but whatever he said he thought he had said to soothe her.

Mr. Blythe was asked if he had used any of the observations referred to in the letter of Dr. Lyle, and he said he
could not say he had not.

The CORONER remarked that Mr. Blythe's conduct had been extremely indiscreet, and after some further conversation,
during which the doctor said the question was whether they would not have to view the body of Mrs. Gouldstone, the
subject dropped, and the witnesses were called.

Police-Sergeant Smith and Police-sergeant Bryan having given evidence of the removal of the bodies of the children
to the mortuary,

Inspector Folkard, of the N Division, said,—At 6 o'clock on Wednesday, the 8th inst., I was at Lea Bridge-road
Police-station when Police-constable Cheeseman brought William Gouldstone in. Cheeseman said "This is a charge of
murder; this man has murdered his five children." Prisoner said "That is right, Sir, I did it; now I am happy. I
did it like a man too." I later on took the doctor (Dr. Gould) to the house and found Charles Gouldstone, Herbert,
and Frederick dead on the floor in the kitchen. I returned to the station and booked the charge against the
prisoner. He said "Quite right, Sir. How is the missus? I suppose some of you gentlemen have been around to the
house." The doctor said "Tolerable." Prisoner asked "Are the two young ones dead?" I told him "No." At 8.30 on the
9th I told him he would be further charged with murdering the other two children. He replied "Yes, Sir, the other
two are dead then?" I said "Yes."

Mr. Henry Gould, a surgeon of Lea Bridge-road, the divisional surgeon for the police division, said,—On Wednesday
night, the 8th inst., at about 6 o'clock, I was called by Inspector Folkard and accompanied him to the house, 8,
Courtenay-place, St. James's-street. On entering the house I immediately went into the front upper room and saw
lying upon the bed the twin children said to be seven days old. They were both in a comatose condition and
breathing in a spasmodic and irregular way. On examining them I found that the right side of the face and head of
one was very much bruised and blackened, and I could feel the skull beneath was fractured. The back of the head of
the other one was much contused and swollen, and I also felt that the skull of that one was fractured. Blood and
froth were oozing from the mouth and nose of the first one. I observed no other injuries about them. They were not
then dead. I then went into the kitchen and saw there three children lying in a row on their backs on the floor.
They were dead, and from the state of their clothes, which were wet, they appeared to have been in water. I saw no
marks of violence about the two younger of the three, but there was on the elder an indentation mark around the
neck, apparently caused by a cord or some stout string. Shortly after 8 o'clock, while at the police-station, I
received information that one of the infants had died, upon which I went to No. 8, Courtenay-place. At 7 10 a.m.
the following day I visited the house again and found that the other infant had died. I made the post-mortem
examination on Thursday, the 9th inst., at 3 40 p.m. of all the five children. Witness then detailed at length the
notes of his post-mortem examination, and from the results, he said he was of opinion that the first male infant
died from an injury to the brain caused by a violent blow; the second male infant succumbed from a similar cause.
The other three children died from drowning. He was of opinion that the cord or stout string that had been tied
around the elder lad's neck, causing an indentation, had not been tied tight enough to cause death of itself.

This was the whole of the evidence, and

The CORONER summed up the case at great length, remarking that it was, as he had said when he first addressed
them, a most heartless and cruel one. The question of Insanity they had nothing to do with, for that was a subject
for another tribunal to deal with.

The jury then, without hesitation, returned a verdict of "Wilful Murder" against William Gouldstone, and
subsequently they signed five verdicts to that effect.

The funeral of the five children took place yesterday at noon at the Walthamstow Cemetery, the last solemn rites
being undertaken by the Rev. T. H. Grantham Robinson, the vicar of St. Saviour's, Walthamstow. The funeral had been
fixed to take place at 3 o'clock in the afternoon, but in order to prevent the assemblage of a large crowd while
the proceedings were progressing, it was determined, with the approval of the mourners, to inter the children
three hours earlier than had been in the first instance arranged. Mrs. Graves, in whose house at Hackney Gouldstone
and his wife and children lived before they came to Walthamstow, was present, as was also the wife of one of the
prisoner's uncles and her daughter. The children, each inclosed in a small elm coffin, were buried in a grave in
the third-class portion of the cemetery. Over 1,000 persons were present at the funeral, though it took place three
hours earlier than announced. About 3 o'clock crowds of people poured into the cemetery to witness the interment,
to find, however, that it had taken place. As soon as the grave was filled up it was covered with flowers of all
kinds, many a tearful eye being observed around the little mound of earth. The whole of the afternoon, and until
the cemetery gates closed, visitors constantly arrived to visit the grave, the top of which was literally covered
with floral tributes, many of which had been carried into the cemetery in small baskets by children.
