Source image: The Evening News Aug 11 1883.png
Newspaper/title if visible: The Evening News
Date if visible: Aug. 11, 1883
Page/column/article if known: Article headed “THE MURDER OF FIVE CHILDREN. THE INQUEST. STATEMENT BY THE PRISONER.”
Transcription scope: Visible article text in the uploaded clipping.
Transcription status: Reviewed
TRANSCRIPTION

THE MURDER OF FIVE CHILDREN.

THE INQUEST.

STATEMENT BY THE PRISONER.

Mr. C. C. Lewis, the coroner for the southern division of Essex, held an inquest yesterday afternoon at the Board room of the Walthamstow Cemetery, on the bodies of the five children—Charles, aged 3½ years; Herbert, aged 2½ years; and Frederick, aged sixteen months, who were drowned; and two infant boys, aged seven days, unnamed, who were struck on the head with a hammer and killed by their father, William Gouldstone, on Wednesday night last.

The first witness called was Ada Hamilton, of 8, Courtenay-place, St. James’s-street, Walthamstow, the wife of a jeweller, who said:—I have been with my husband living in the house three weeks. I had been engaged to attend Mrs. Gouldstone in her confinement as nurse. She was attended by a medical man, and was confined on August 1st. She was delivered of twins, two boys. All went on well till last Wednesday night. Gouldstone frequently saw his wife after her confinement. He went to see her every night when he came home from work. He had never, however, asked to look at the newly-born boys. He slept in the kitchen. Last Wednesday night he returned home at about a quarter past five o’clock. Mr. Gouldstone came into the bedroom and stood by the bedside of his wife, but he never spoke. His wife said to him, “How is it you are so early home to-night?” He said, “I left when the manager went for his dinner.” He worked at 67, Upper Thames-street. She then asked, “Have you told them at the shop that I have been confined?” She meant the workshop. He replied, “No.” She had at this time her little boy Freddy, 16 months old, on the bed at the foot, and Gouldstone picked it up and took it into the kitchen. By that time I had finished washing and dressing the first baby, and had laid it down by its mother’s side. I had occasion to go out into the kitchen, and saw all the three children playing on the floor there, the father sitting on the fireguard. I returned to the bedroom, and said to Mr. Gouldstone, “Now, I’ll make your bed if you get out.” I got Mrs. Gouldstone out of bed, and I put her back again. I then asked Gouldstone if I should go out of the room, but he did not answer. I went downstairs, leaving Mrs. Gouldstone with her two infants by her side. When I reached the yard door I heard cries of “Murder!” and I recognised Mrs. Gouldstone’s voice. I ran upstairs and tried to open the bedroom door, but it was locked on the inside. She said, “Open the door, he is murdering my children.” I tried to force the door, but could not. I called “Help,” and Mrs. Clarke (the landlady of the house) came running upstairs, and we both tried to force the door. Gouldstone opened the door. I said, “Oh, you wicked man; what have you done?” I had not then seen anything done to the children. Mrs. Gouldstone was at the foot of the bedstead. She said, “Come and look at my babies, and see if he has killed them.” I passed into the room, and saw the two babies on a pillow behind her. She was down at the foot—where I had laid them. They were each bleeding from the nose and the mouth, and one of them had a bruise right over one of its eyes. They were both breathing. When I said, “Oh, you wicked man,” he said “No, I am not a wicked man; I am a happy man.” I passed in and stood by Mrs. Gouldstone’s side. She told me that he had murdered the other three children, and she asked me to go and see after them. I had no previous idea that they were dead. As I entered the kitchen door I saw Gouldstone bringing little Frederick in his arms from the scullery. His clothes were wringing wet. I put my head out of the door, and saw a policeman standing in the kitchen. Gouldstone and the constable went into Mrs. Gouldstone’s bedroom. She said, “Will you give me all the money you have? I have my doctor to pay;” and he gave her all he had in his pocket. He then kissed her, and said “Good-bye,” and the constable then removed him from the house.

William Cheeseman, police constable, 26 N, stationed at Lea Bridge-road, who took the prisoner into custody, said: On going to the house I saw William Gouldstone in the kitchen. He was in a stooping position over three children lying side by side on the floor. The three children appeared to be dead, and were thoroughly drenched with water. Gouldstone had his coat and hat off, and his shirt-sleeves tucked up. As soon as he saw me he came towards the door and said “Good evening, policeman. I have done it; now I am happy. I am ready for the rope.” I cautioned him that whatever he said would be used in evidence against him. He then put on his coat and hat, and said, “Let me see my wife.” I took him into the bedroom, and his wife said, “Oh, you wicked man, what have you done?” He said, “I have killed all your children. Now you’ll be single again, and I shall be hanged.” His wife said, “Have you any money?” He said, “Yes,” and gave her all he had. He then kissed her and bade her “Good-bye.” On the way to the police-station he said, “When I took my money last week I thought of buying a revolver to do it with, but I altered my mind, as I thought it would make too much noise. I had a hard job with the two eldest, but the other little one—I soon settled him. I thought it was getting too hot. I have had five children in about three years and a half, so I thought I would put a stop to it.” At the police-station he said “I’ve done it like a man,” and when he was charged—the charge being read over to him by the inspector—with having murdered the five children, he said, “Quite right, sir.”

The inquiry was then adjourned.

