THE WALTHAMSTOW TRAGEDY.
Daily Chronicle, 13 August 1883

On Saturday, at Stratford Petty Sessions, before Messrs. N. Powell, J. Spicer, W. W. Glenny, and A. Lister, William Gouldstone, described as a whitesmith, of 8, Courtenay-place, St. James's-street, Walthamstow, was brought up, on remand, charged with wilfully having last Wednesday murdered his five children, namely, Charles Gouldstone, three and a half years old; Herbert Gouldstone, two and a half years old; and Frederick Gouldstone, aged 15 months, by drowning them in a cistern in the house; and two infants, twins, seven days old, by striking them on the head with a hammer as they lay in bed by the side of their mother.

A crowd assembled outside the court-house, in the hope of gaining admission, and the court itself was crowded. The prisoner, a young man of low stature and fair complexion, with a slight moustache, upon being placed in the dock, nodded complacently in recognition to Mrs. Hamilton, a lodger at 8, Courtenay-place, and nurse to Mrs. Gouldstone, but Mrs. Hamilton, who was seated with other witnesses at the side of the court facing the dock, did not appear to notice the nod of the prisoner. The accused then folded his arms and leaned upon the dock rail while the charge was read over to him. Mr. Atkinson, solicitor, of Stratford, appeared for the defence.

Mrs. Hamilton was recalled, and the evidence she gave at the former examination read over to her. This evidence, detailing the nature of the crime, has already been published. The prisoner looked calmly around the court, and with firmly compressed lips, maintained a stolid demeanour till the point in the evidence of Mrs. Hamilton where she identified a piece of cord that she saw the prisoner handling in the kitchen of the house just before the murders. When this cord was held up by a policeman for identification by the witness the prisoner pointed significantly to his throat. The hammer used by the murders was also produced and identified by the witness.

After the evidence of Mrs. Hamilton had been read over, Mr. Wells (the clerk to the magistrates) asked Inspector Craggs, who represented the prosecution, if he wished a further remand to be granted.

Inspector Craggs: Yes. The Treasury will take up the prosecution, and I ask for an adjournment for a week.

Mr. Atkinson said he had a few questions to put to the witness, Mrs. Hamilton, but if the magistrates were going to again remand the prisoner, perhaps he had better defer them till the next hearing.

The magistrates decided to remand the prisoner for a week, and the cross-examination of Mrs. Hamilton was deferred till then.

The prisoner was then removed.

Though the largest of the three courts was used for the trial of the prisoner on Saturday, 200 or 300 people were outside, unable to gain admission. In the morning a rumour found credence that the prisoner would be brought from the House of Detention at the Maryland Point Station of the Great Eastern Railway, and a corridingly many people went to the station to await his arrival, but they were disappointed, for Gouldstone and the officers in charge of him alighted at Stratford Station, on the main line. By some thoughtlessness the police, instead of bringing Gouldstone from the station to the Court, made him walk the distance of about half a mile. He was not at once recognised, but as soon as he was loudly hooted and yelled at until he was got out of sight of the mob. By the time the case was over, some better precautions were taken. The crowd was awaiting the prisoner's departure to get a glimpse of him, but very few of them were gratified. The mob being thickest at the door through which prisoners are usually taken away, the police saw this, so they brought the prisoner through the First Court, and then, slipping up a pathway leading to the side entrance of a coffee shop, immediately opposite the public entrance to the court, they were permitted to pass through the shop, and in this manner they got Gouldstone into a cab, and drove hurriedly off with him. Getting scent of the manoeuvre, the crowd took a short cut to the station, and meeting the cab as they hooted the prisoner till he arrived at the railway station, where some extra police were on duty, and kept them back until the train had left.

TO THE EDITOR OF THE DAILY CHRONICLE.

SIR -- As the public are naturally anxious for the fullest information in relation to the fearful tragedy which has just taken place at Walthamstow, and entertain the deepest sympathy with the unfortunate man and child's mother, they will be pleased to learn that the accouchement fees, for the payment of which the poor woman showed herself so anxious at such a supreme moment, were at once kindly returned by Mr. Sutton, her medical attendant. The fact that the twins, of which Mrs. Gouldstone had been so safely delivered, were so uncommonly fine children, makes the circumstances of this sad event still more pitiful. It is to be hoped that something will be done to aid Mrs. Gouldstone, who is at such a fearful time in the greatest distress. -- I am, Sir, very faithfully yours, EDWARD SMITH. 6, Colchester-road, Walthamstow, Aug. 11.

---
TRANSCRIPTION NOTES
Source: The Daily Chronicle, 13 August 1883
Repository image: sources/images/Media-coverage/The Daily Chronicle Aug 13 1883.png
NEW AND SIGNIFICANT DETAIL: "When this cord was held up by a policeman for identification by the witness the prisoner pointed significantly to his throat." William, on seeing the cord he had been tying in the kitchen produced as evidence, gestured to his own throat. This is the clearest indication we have that he understood -- and perhaps invited -- his own fate, or that the cord carried meaning connected to strangulation/suicide for him. Significant for Part Three and possibly Part Two.
KEY: Public reaction -- a hostile crowd hooted and yelled at William as he was walked from Stratford station to the court, and again at the railway station on his departure. The case had already become a public spectacle within days.
KEY: A reader's letter (Edward Smith) reveals: the local doctor, Mr. Sutton, voluntarily returned the fee Elizabeth had been so anxious to pay for her confinement -- the very fee William claimed he wanted to discuss privately with her before the murders. A small, devastating piece of irony: the debt that supposedly needed discussing was waived once the children were dead.
KEY: William described here as "a young man of low stature and fair complexion, with a slight moustache" -- consistent with the Daily Telegraph 10 Aug description (fair, light-coloured hair and moustache, medium height).
