THE MURDER OF FIVE CHILDREN AT WALTHAMSTOW.
The Times, 20 August 1883

At the Stratford Petty Sessions on Saturday, before the Half-Hundred of Becontree Division, William Gouldstone, 26, of 8, Courtenay-place, St. James's-street, Walthamstow, was again brought up on the charge of murdering his five children. At the close of the case already heard, an adjournment was again allowed, owing to the further inquiries already in progress. Mr. Batchelor, solicitor, now appeared to prosecute on behalf of the Treasury, and Mr. Atkinson again appeared for the prisoner.

P. C. Cheeseman, 86 N, was recalled, and repeated his evidence as to the house of the prisoner on the floor of the room standing over them in a stooping position. He had his coat and hat off, and his shirt sleeves were tucked up. "When the prisoner saw me he stood up and said to me, 'Good evening, policeman; I am happy now. I am ready for the rope.'" I cautioned him, telling him that whatever he said would be used in evidence against him. He should not be in evidence to be informed against him. Having put on his hat and coat I then took him into the bedroom. His wife said, "Oh, you wicked man, what have you done?" He replied, "I have killed all your children, and now I am happy man." On the road to the police-station prisoner said, "When I took my money last week I thought of buying a revolver, but I altered my mind, but I altered my mind, and thought it would put a stop to it." It was the better way leaving them to the mercy of the world.

Police-constable Honey, 41 N Reserve, and Inspector Folkard, repeated the evidence they had previously given, and the latter said that it was 6ft. from the floor, and 10in. from the ceiling. It was 14in. deep.

By Mr. Atkinson -- I was awake the whole of the time. There were three of them out of him, only used to give him to glory, only for time to time. There's five of them to glory, and it is a good job."

At about 9 o'clock he said, "I wish I had killed the little one out of the way." I do not know if I hit him once or twice. I have had this preying on my mind for a good while.

By Mr. Atkinson -- He was afraid that he was well up in question of insanity, in his presumed statements, observed, it was a separate matter and arrangement strange about him. He was very cool.

Mr. Henry Gould, M.R.C.S., L.A.S. Lond., the divisional surgeon of police for the district, said -- On the 8th inst., at about six o'clock, I was called by Inspector Folkard, and went with him to Courtenay-place. I went into the front room on the first floor and saw two male children, of about a week old. I examined the injuries and found one had a fractured skull. I went into the kitchen and there I saw three other children lying on the floor, dead, and the floor and clothes were soaked. I saw no marks of violence on two of the children, but on the eldest there was an indentation mark of a cord round the neck. The same evening I found one of the infants dead, and the next morning I found the other dead. Since then I have made post-mortem examinations on the bodies. As to the two younger children I found that death had resulted from injury to the brain. As to the three others, the cause of death was suffocation from drowning. All the children were well nourished.

By Mr. Atkins -- I have only seen the prisoner once. I should like to be allowed to get a few words in defence of the case for the consideration of this Court; if information were wanted I had no information were wanted I had no through counsel or another place.

The Bench having consented to the cross-examination, Mr. Batchelor said this was.

Dr. Gould, however, recalled by Mr. Lister, and in reply to a question, said he was not aware if any means had been taken to restore animation from the three children, and a man had been at the house from that morning.

The prisoner was then committed to take his trial at the Central Criminal Court, reserving his defence.

---
TRANSCRIPTION NOTES
Source: The Times, 20 August 1883
Repository image: sources/images/Media-coverage/The_Times_20_Aug.jpg
This covers the final committal hearing on Saturday 18 August 1883, at which William was committed for trial at the Old Bailey. Image quality and some compositor errors made portions of the text difficult to render with full confidence; the substance is preserved.
KEY: This confirms Henry Gould's measurements of the cistern -- 6ft. from the floor, 10in. from the ceiling, 14in. deep -- matching the figures already established in the Old Bailey trial transcript and used in the Prologue.
KEY: Confirms William's cell statement timeline: "At about 9 o'clock he said, 'I wish I had killed the little one out of the way. I do not know if I hit him once or twice. I have had this preying on my mind for a good while.'" Consistent with previously established record, though "preying" here applies to a singular "little one" rather than the plural "little ones" used elsewhere -- minor wording variance, note for accuracy (other sources, including the Old Bailey transcript with cross-examination confirming "preying" not "playing," use the plural).
KEY: William's full statement on the cause is partially garbled in this source but appears to include: "It was the better way leaving them to the mercy of the world" -- consistent with the fuller cell statement already established ("the children will be better off in heaven... it is better than leaving them to the mercy of the world").
NOTE: Significant compositor/OCR garbling throughout this article makes some passages unreliable for direct quotation. Where this transcription differs from the clearer Old Bailey trial transcript or coroner depositions already in the repository, DEFER TO THOSE SOURCES.
