TO THE EDITOR OF THE TIMES.
The Times, 19 September 1883

Sir, -- It is a difficult thing to bring the public mind to think that a man who deliberately kills his five children ought not to be hanged as an example to deter others from doing the same thing. In the case of the convict Gouldstone there is reason to believe that what he wanted was to compass his own death, and he adopted an irrational method to accomplish what he desired. In any other case than murder an irrational act is accepted as ground at least for suspicion that the mind of the perpetrator is disordered; but in cases of murder no account is taken of the unreason of the act. The fact that a man of good character, under the influence of a cause, or causes, held to be utterly inadequate by persons of sound mind, suddenly commits an act inconsistent with all his previous history is in any other event than the perpetration of murder regarded as a very serious symptom arousing the most anxious fears on the part of his friends, especially if he has insane relations, but the law ignores all this, and asserts that a man is responsible for his actions if he knows the nature and quality of the act he commits, and that it is forbidden by law. This standard of responsibility is directly opposed to the established judgment of every person who has had any experience of the disordered mind. I sympathize with Dr. Savage as to his sense of duty as a recognized authority in such a matter, impelling him to make a public appeal for some further investigation of the circumstances. I agree with him that the act of William Gouldstone, taking into account the whole history, was an insane act, and none the less so because on every other subject his conduct and conversation was rational.

I am, Sir, your obedient servant,
W. WOOD, M.D., Physician to St. Luke's Hospital.
No. 99, Harley-street, Sept. 17.

---
TRANSCRIPTION NOTES
Source: The Times, 19 September 1883
Repository image: sources/images/Media-coverage/The_Times_19_Sep.jpg
A letter to the editor from Dr W. Wood, Physician to St Luke's Hospital, published five days after the guilty verdict and three days before the BMJ's major 22 September article.
KEY: This is the EARLIEST confirmed instance found to date of the "compass his own death" / suicide-by-proxy theory of William's motive appearing in print -- predating the BMJ's 22 September article by three days. Wood's letter and the BMJ piece may share a common source, or the BMJ may have drawn directly on this letter or on a shared understanding circulating in medical circles that week.
KEY: Wood explicitly references "Dr. Savage" and "his sense of duty as a recognized authority... impelling him to make a public appeal for some further investigation" -- this confirms Savage was already publicly campaigning for further investigation of the case by 17 September 1883 (the date of Wood's letter), i.e. within days of the verdict, and that this was known and discussed in the medical correspondence pages of The Times before Savage's own Lancet letter (14 September, already in repository) or the BMJ pieces.
KEY: Wood explicitly references "insane relations" as a relevant factor -- confirms the family history of insanity was already a matter of public discussion in the immediate aftermath of the trial.
This letter belongs in Part Three, in the sequence of medical correspondence responding to the verdict, before the BMJ's fuller treatment.
