THE WALTHAMSTOW MURDERS.
Western Daily Press, 18 September 1883

Mr George H. Savage, M.D., physician at Bethlehem Hospital, feels it his duty to write about the case of William Gouldstone, who has just been convicted of the murder of his children. Justice, says Dr. Savage, demands further investigation of the case. After urging arguments in favour of the prisoner's insanity, Dr. Savage expresses a hope that the prisoner will not suffer the penalty of death.

The following letter, signed by William Graves, foreman, for himself and his fellow-workmen, appears in the Daily Telegraph: -- We, being all the men who work in the smiths' shop in which William Gouldstone was employed, unhesitatingly say that he was of unsound mind when he committed the murder. We base this opinion upon the intimate daily intercourse we have had with him during the last four years and a half, and we consider it a great hardship that we were not allowed to put this evidence before the jury. Had we had any doubt on the subject we should not have taken up his case as we have done. We should be grateful if you would make this, our opinion, known to the public.

---
TRANSCRIPTION NOTES
Source: Western Daily Press, 18 September 1883
Repository image: sources/images/Media-coverage/Western_Daily_Press_18_Sep.jpg
Already substantially captured in master notes (the Graves/workmen letter is in Section 9 of the master index, "Key Quotes"). This transcription confirms the source and exact date: the Graves letter was published in the Daily Telegraph and reprinted here on 18 September 1883, four days after the verdict.
KEY: Confirms Savage was already publicly campaigning in the press by 18 September -- consistent with Wood's Times letter of 19 September referencing Savage's public appeal, and predating the BMJ's first major piece (22 September) by four days.
KEY: The workmen's collective letter is dated to this republication on 18 September; "four years and a half" matches Graves's Old Bailey testimony that William had worked there about five years and married some four or five months after starting.
