THE WALTHAMSTOW TRAGEDY.
COMMITTAL OF THE PRISONER.
Bury Free Press, 23 August 1883

At the Stratford Petty Sessions on Saturday, in the Court-house of the Half-Hundred of Becontree Division, William Gouldstone, 26, of Courtenay-place, St. James's-street, Walthamstow, was again brought up on the charge of murdering his five children, on the 8th inst., at his residence, in different circumstances already given. The inquiry had been held the previous Monday before the coroner, and the jury had returned a verdict of "Wilful murder" against the prisoner.

Mr. Batchelor, solicitor, now appeared to prosecute on behalf of the Public Prosecutor, and Mr. Atkinson, solicitor, watched the case for the defence. -- We take the following report of the evidence from The Times of Monday: --

Mrs. Ada Hamilton, the nurse to Mrs. Gouldstone, in her confinement, was again called, and she repeated the evidence she gave at the previous examination, and added (when Mrs. Gouldstone was confined of twins) "since the twins were born he had not looked at them." Prisoner, she alleged simply, told her previous statement that prisoner appeared to be in a desponding and absent-minded state.

Police-constable Cheeseman, 86 N, recalled, and having repeated the evidence he had previously given, said he asked the prisoner if he had recollected the house of the prisoner in his kitchen -- they were upstairs -- and saw three children lying on the floor in a stooping position. He had his coat and hat off, and his shirt was unbuttoned. When the prisoner saw him he said, "Good evening, policeman; now I am happy and ready for the rope." I cautioned him to know whatever he said would be used in evidence against him. I had a hard job with the two biggest, but the other little one I soon settled him. I had had five kids in three years and a half. It is time I put a stop to it." When charged he said, "I will give the little child the better off in heaven, if such a place be where there is the mercy of the world."

Police-constable Wheatley, 208 N, also gave evidence. At about a quarter to 7 o'clock at the station, he said, "I have had an extra drop of drink to accomplish this job. There's five of them gone to glory, and it is a good job." At half-past 7 o'clock he said, "I have had I wish I had killed the little one out of the way; and I do not know if I hit him once or twice. I have had this preying on my mind for a good while."

By Mr. Atkinson -- He was afraid that he was well up question of insanity, in his presumed statements. I observed no traces of drink about him. He was very cool.

Mr. Henry Gould, M.R.C.S., L.A.S., divisional surgeon of police, said -- On the 8th inst., at about six o'clock, I was called by Inspector Folkard, and went with him into the front room on the first floor. I there saw a bed in which were two male children, only a few days old, both fractured and blood had issued from the mouth and nose of the one. I noticed when I examined the indentation mark of a cord that had been tied round the neck. The same evening at seven o'clock I found that one of the younger children had died. From subsequent examination, I have made post-mortem examinations on the bodies of all the five children. The skull was fractured and blood and clot found beneath. I have made a post-mortem examination on this child. I found no marks of violence on the front but the indent mark of a cord that had been around the neck. I have no doubt the deaths of the three younger children were caused from suffocation by drowning. All of the children were well nourished.

By Mr. Atkinson -- I have only seen the prisoner once and I am sorry I am not acquainted with the "Cyclopedia of Practical Medicine."

Mr. Wells: It is scientific evidence, I presume. I will state the order of the case.

Dr. Gould volunteered some immediate observation. He said I did not hear him rambling or mumbling to himself. I did not notice any traces of drink about him; he was very cool.

Mr. Batchelor said that, as Mr. Wells had remarked, it was a long extract, and only desired to take it down.

The prisoner was then committed to the Central Criminal Court for trial, reserving his defence.

---
TRANSCRIPTION NOTES
Source: Bury Free Press, 23 August 1883
Repository image: sources/images/Media-coverage/The Bury Free Press Aug 23 1883.png
This covers the committal hearing of 18 August 1883 in more legible form than The Times 20 August version, though both report the same proceedings. Some compositor errors and garbled passages remain (the article itself draws on a Times report and reproduces some of its compositor issues).
KEY: Confirms the coroner's jury had already, by this point (the previous Monday, c.20 August), returned a formal verdict of "Wilful murder" against William.
KEY: William "appeared to be in a desponding and absent-minded state" -- Ada's characterisation in this account.
KEY: Confirms Henry Gould's cause of death findings for all five children, broadly consistent with his fuller Old Bailey and coroner deposition testimony already in repository.
This article largely corroborates The Times 20 August report (same hearing); where the two differ in legibility, this version is generally the clearer source.
