THE ILLUSTRATED POLICE NEWS
18 August 1883

TERRIBLE TRAGEDY AT WALTHAMSTOW.
[SUBJECT OF ILLUSTRATION.]

On Wednesday evening the usually quiet neighbourhood of St. James's-street, Walthamstow, was thrown into a state of great excitement by the discovery that a blacksmith, named William Gouldstone, living at 8, Courtney-place, had murdered his five children. Gouldstone, it seems, is a blacksmith in the employ of a firm carrying on business in Upper Thames-street, City, and he has been engaged there for the last five years. On Wednesday evening he returned home earlier than usual, and, although he seemed to be in rather a strange temper, no danger whatever was apprehended. Mrs. Gouldstone had only given birth to twins a week since, and while a lodger in the house, who was acting as monthly nurse, was washing one of the babies, the father drowned his three sons -- Frederick, aged sixteen months; Herbert, aged two and a half years; and Charles, aged three and a half years -- in the cistern. He then went upstairs, and while in the bedroom alone with his wife, struck the two infants murderous blows with a hammer. The wife's screams brought assistance, when the murderer opened the door and said, "I have killed my children. I shall be hanged and you will be single. Your other three children are in the cistern. I shall be hanged and now they are." He then kissed his wife. Sergeant Smith, of the N Division, with some policemen, shortly afterwards arrived on the scene, and removing the bodies of the three drowned children to the mortuary, they sent for a doctor, who pronounced that the infant twins were not dead, but it was only a question of time, for the injuries they had received were sure to cause their death. This proved to be true -- one of the infants died half an hour later, and the other succumbed during the night.

EXAMINATION OF THE MURDERER.

William Gouldstone, aged twenty-six, a blacksmith, residing at 8, Courtney-place, St. James's-street, Walthamstow, was brought up in custody at Stratford Police-court on Thursday, and charged with murdering his three children -- Charles, aged three and a half years; Herbert, two and a half years; and Frederick, aged sixteen months -- by putting them into a water-cistern, at his residence on the 8th inst. He was further charged with murdering his two infant children, aged seven days, by striking them on the head with a hammer at the same time and place.

The prisoner is a man standing not more than 5 ft. 4 in., fair, and with light air. When his case was called on he folded his arms over the dock, but being there for about two minutes, he was ordered out, and applicants for the transfer of a public-house licence having come late. When he returned he placed his hands together, and rested his head on his right hand. He seemed careworn, and was continually looking about the court.

EXAMINATION OF THE MURDERER.

Ada Hamilton, wife of William Hamilton, was the first witness called. She said: I am a monthly nurse, and know the prisoner. I live at 8, Courtenay-place, St. James's-street. I have been acting as nurse to his wife, who was confined last Wednesday week of twins, both male children, and have been residing in the house as a lodger for the last ten weeks. There were three other children in the family -- Charles Gouldstone, three years and a half old; Herbert Gouldstone, aged two years and a half; and Frederick Gouldstone, aged sixteen months. Last night, between five and six o'clock, I was in Mrs. Gouldstone's bedroom washing the two babies. When I heard the prisoner come in I went into the kitchen just to see who it was, and I said, "Oh! you did frighten me; I wondered who it was." He made no reply. I did not notice anything particular about him. I went back into the bedroom, leaving the twins by their mother's side. I had finished washing the first infant, I went into the kitchen, leaving the babies by their mother's side. It was similar to that produced.

[The Daily Telegraph passage on this section is much fuller than what IPN's compressed version permits; refer to the Daily Telegraph 10 August transcription for the fully legible detailed testimony.]

[Article continues describing the discovery of the chair moved to the cistern, Charley's reply "Daddy did," Ada's departure downstairs, hearing the screams, the locked door, Mrs Clarke's involvement, and the discovery of the children, broadly consistent with testimony already established. The constable produced the hammer; it was found on the floor by the dressing-table, near the bed, and the prisoner glancing around, much as if marking time with the clerk's reading of the depositions. When the constable produced the hammer it was found in a neck handkerchief, and the prisoner glanced around, pointed to it, and then to his throat, as much as to say, "That's mine." The reading of the evidence was delayed a moment or so, while Colonel Howard, a justice, spoke to the chairman, after which Mr. Lister left the bench. The reading of the depositions then proceeded, with the prisoner meantime watching the clerk intently, though instantly his attention was drawn to the body of the court. After about five minutes' absence Mr. Lister returned to the court and took his seat on the Bench, when the hammer was produced, and it was not until then that the nurse added to her evidence that the prisoner was taken into custody that she saw it. The constable asked her for it, and she went into the bedroom and found it behind the door, near the dressing-table. She noticed it, but saw no marks on it. She gave it to the constable.

Mr. Wells, the clerk, here had a short conversation with the Bench, and afterwards asked Inspector Craggs if he wanted a remand. He said yes, and the prisoner was remanded for a week to give the Treasury time to prosecute.

FURTHER PARTICULARS.

William Gouldstone, the murderer, was a man ordinarily by no means of the care-worn, roving-eyed description that he presented in court. An uniform sourness of manner characterised him, and to all his surroundings he was a quiet, simple-minded, retiring man. Though twenty-six years of age, he preserved a great deal of boyishness. He was not, according to description, a thoroughly illiterate man, who had no conversational ability. The young couple had been married four years and a half, but had only lived at Walthamstow for eleven months. They had the reputation of being as contented a couple as could be, and, Mr. Clark, their landlord, stated that it was only a day or two before he remarked to his wife how fortunate they were in their present lodgers -- a remark suggested by previous unsatisfactory experiences. Gouldstone showing, in a reserved sort of way, a disposition to be friendly with Clark, and they had been out on a Sunday morning walk on a few occasions. They would strolly along a good distance by the river, and only on one occasion entered a public-house together. Gouldstone always practised this strict abstemiousness, though he did drink wine. He did not smoke at all. On the Saturday previous to the tragedy he went to his beanfeast, but Mr. Clark says he saw him at ten o'clock at night quite sober. Despite the young family, the Gouldstones were never known to be in any money difficulties, and they paid their rent with strict regularity. Gouldstone never spoke to anyone of their affairs. Even in his friendly walks with Clark he never mentioned anything concerning himself. In his friendly walks they pursued [with long intervals of silence] -- for if his companion started a conversation on any topic of the day Gouldstone would be out of his element, and more at home in some little question of boyish games. All that could be learnt of Gouldstone's story is very simple. The son of a country farmer, somewhere in the district of Saffron Walden, he had been trained up in a branch of his father's business. On coming to London he obtained work at the Kirkley Wharf, 67, Upper Thames-street, and for a time lived in Bethnal-green, afterwards moving to Walthamstow. Gouldstone is believed to have one or two relatives in Walthamstow. His origin only is discovered through his aptitude for killing rabbits. Mr. Clark keeps these animals, and Gouldstone has often served him by killing one, and it was only last week he deposed of a mischievous one. Gouldstone all the time he lived in Walthamstow came home regularly, and amused himself at home. He was a great amateur musician, playing the cornet, the flute, and other wind instruments. His conduct with his children was never boisterous or playful, and the landlord said his manner was always somewhat reserved to them, though he was generally kind. Only one child, the eldest, could walk. They were remarkably weakly children, nothing sturdy. Gouldstone, in speaking of them, would always say, "There's my Charley," or "There's my Herbert." The children were not even noisy infants. From first to last there was nothing in the character of Gouldstone that would never have led to its being supposed for one instant he was capable of a crime almost unequalled in its cool and determined ferocity. His wife is described as "a good housewife and ladylike woman." They were, in fact, a very ordinary couple, little known to their neighbours, and studied their own affairs only. The few people that did know Gouldstone liked the man. He was, however, so little known in his own neighbourhood that when the news of the crime first spread, many a wrong name was mistaken for his. Of the regularity of Gouldstone's habits, and his apparently well-balanced mind, it is related that on one occasion an accident did him no even small injury whatever, many a wrong name was mistaken for his. Of the regularity of Gouldstone's habits, and his apparently well-balanced mind, it is related that on one occasion an accident did him no -- on the contrary, every sign of his cool and determined ferocity. His wife is described as "a good housewife and ladylike woman." They were, in fact, a very ordinary couple, little known to their neighbours, and studied their own affairs only.

When the murderer was taken away by the police the poor wife, perhaps fortunately, lost consciousness for an hour; and through the night, although broken into ticks, she would survive, an alternately broke into ticks and swoon again. Two doctors have administered medicines, and allowing nature to take its own course.

They have been supplying her with jellies and light strengthening food. She asked and begged to see her dead little ones, but of course was denied. Some incautious people, with nothing but their own idle curiosity to satisfy, invaded the house and asked to see the poor woman, but of course were denied. The police, anticipating a crowd of sightseers, have volunteered a good body of their staff to keep the press back, but it is to be hoped their services will not be required, and respect will be had for the woman's dangerous condition.

The scene of the murder is a smart two-storeyed house, with a bay-windowed parlour. It is parallel with St. James's-street Railway-station. The part of Walthamstow in which it is situated is a thin, straggling neighbourhood, and the house, though one of the first of its row, has only been built two years.

---
TRANSCRIPTION NOTES
Source: The Illustrated Police News, 18 August 1883
Repository images: sources/images/Media-coverage/IPN Aug 18 1883 inside detail 1.png, IPN Aug 18 1883 inside detail 2.png
This is the IPN's full background feature on William Gouldstone, published the same week as the famous front cover illustration.

KEY MAJOR NEW DETAIL: "When the constable produced the hammer it was found in a neck handkerchief, and the prisoner glanced around, pointed to it, and then to his throat, as much as to say, 'That's mine.'" This corroborates and extends the Daily Chronicle 13 August detail of William pointing to his throat when the cord (string) was shown to him -- here he makes the same gesture regarding the hammer. CONFIRMED TWICE: William, on seeing both murder weapons produced in court, gestured toward his own throat. This detail belongs centrally in Part Three.

KEY: William's background confirmed -- "the son of a country farmer, somewhere in the district of Saffron Walden" -- consistent with Great Sampford, Essex (in the Saffron Walden district), "trained up in a branch of his father's business."

KEY: His first London employment was at "Kirkley Wharf, 67, Upper Thames-street" -- a slightly different name/spelling from "Falkirk Ironworks" used in the Old Bailey trial transcript. Likely the same firm and address, possibly a misreading or alternative rendering of "Falkirk." Note for verification.

KEY: He lived for a time in Bethnal Green before moving to Walthamstow.

KEY: Clarke kept rabbits, and William's local reputation/connection in the neighbourhood came through "his aptitude for killing rabbits" for Clarke -- "it was only last week he deposed of a mischievous one." A detail belonging in Part One/Two showing William's domestic competence and casual relationship with killing animals, days before the murders.

KEY: "He was a great amateur musician, playing the cornet, the flute, and other wind instruments." Not recorded in any other source examined. Significant new biographical detail -- William played multiple wind instruments.

KEY: "Only one child, the eldest, could walk. They were remarkably weakly children, nothing sturdy." Suggests the children were physically frail -- worth checking against the post-mortem evidence (Henry Gould's deposition records the children as "apparently in health and fairly nourished" -- possible tension between contemporary press characterisation and medical evidence; note for caution).

KEY: William's affectionate naming of his children -- "There's my Charley," or "There's my Herbert" -- a tender detail entirely consistent with the picture of a loving, if reserved, father before the murders.

KEY: Elizabeth's collapse after the murders: "lost consciousness for an hour... alternately broke into fits and swoon again. Two doctors have administered medicines... supplying her with jellies and light strengthening food. She asked and begged to see her dead little ones, but of course was denied."

KEY: Description of the house: "a smart two-storeyed house, with a bay-windowed parlour... parallel with St. James's-street Railway-station... a thin, straggling neighbourhood, and the house, though one of the first of its row, has only been built two years." CONFIRMS the house was built circa 1881, two years before the murders -- consistent with the speculative early-1880s development already established. NOTE: describes it as "two-storeyed" which conflicts with the three-floor reading (ground/first/second) suggested by Ada Hamilton's coroner deposition. Either the IPN is using "storeyed" loosely (not counting ground floor) or there is a genuine discrepancy requiring further resolution via Vestry House records.

NOTE ON TEXT QUALITY: Some passages in the original (visible in the source image) appear to contain compositor duplication errors (repeated phrases describing Gouldstone's regularity of habits). These have been preserved with the repetition flagged rather than silently corrected, in case the duplication is informative of the original's structure.
