THE MURDER OF FIVE CHILDREN.
THE INQUEST.
STATEMENT BY THE PRISONER.
The Evening News, 11 August 1883

Mr. C. C. Lewis, the coroner for the southern division of Essex, held an inquest yesterday afternoon at the Board room of the Walthamstow Cemetery, on the bodies of the five children -- Charles, aged 3 1/2 years; Herbert, aged 2 1/2 years; and Frederick, aged sixteen months, who were drowned; and two infant boys, aged seven days, unnamed, who were struck on the head with a hammer and killed by their father, William Gouldstone, on Wednesday night last. The first witness called was Ada Hamilton, of 8, Courtenay-place, St. James's-street, Walthamstow, the wife of a jeweller, who said: -- I have been with my husband three weeks. I had been engaged to attend Mrs. Gouldstone in her confinement as a medical attendant nurse. She was confined on August 1st. She went well till last Wednesday night. All went well with twins, both boys. All went well until last Wednesday night. He had never, however, asked to look at the newly-born babies. He slept in the kitchen. Last Wednesday night he returned home about a quarter past 5 o'clock. Mr. Gouldstone came into the bed-room and stood by the bedside of his wife. His wife said to him, "How is it you are home so early to-night?" He said, "I left it when the manager went for his dinner." She then asked, "Have you told them at the shop that I have been confined?" He replied, "No." She had her little boy Freddy, 16 months old, on the bed, at the foot, and picked it up and took it into the kitchen. By that time I had finished washing and dressing the first baby, and laid it down by its mother's side. I had occasion to go into the kitchen, and saw all the three children playing on the floor there, the father sitting on the fireguard. I said to Mrs. Gouldstone, "Now I'll make your bed once you've got out," and I got Mrs. Gouldstone out of bed, and put her back again. I then asked Gouldstone if I should go out of the room, but he did not answer. I went downstairs, leaving her two infants by her side. When I reached the yard door I heard cries of "Murder!" and I recognised Mrs. Gouldstone's voice. I ran upstairs and tried to open the bedroom door, but it was locked on the inside. She said, "Open the door, he is murdering my children." I tried to force the door but could not. I called "Help," and Mrs. Clarke (the landlady of the house) came running upstairs, and we both tried to force the door open. Gouldstone opened the door, and I said, "Oh, you wicked man; what have you done to the children?" Mrs. Gouldstone was at the foot of the bedstead. She said, "Come and look at my babies, and see if he has killed them." I passed into the room, and saw the two babies on a pillow behind her -- where they laid them. They were both bleeding from the nose and the mouth, and one had a bruise near one of its eyes. They were both breathing. When I said, "Oh, you wicked man," he said, "No, I am not a wicked man; I am a happy man." I passed in and stood by Mrs. Gouldstone's side. She told me that he had murdered the other three children, and she asked me to go and see after them. As I entered the kitchen door I saw Gouldstone bringing little Frederick in his arms from the scullery. His clothes were wringing wet. I put my head out of the door, and saw a policeman standing in the kitchen. Gouldstone went into Mrs. Gouldstone's bedroom. She said, "Will you give me all the money you have, my doctor to pay?" He gave her all he had in his pocket. He then kissed her and said, "Good-bye," and the constable then removed him from the house.

William Cheeseman, police constable, 26 N, stationed at Lea Bridge-road, who took the prisoner into custody, said: -- On going to the house I saw William Gouldstone in the kitchen. He was in a stooping position over three children lying side by side on the floor. The three children appeared to be dead, and thoroughly drenched with water. Gouldstone had his coat and hat off, and had his shirt-sleeves tucked up. As soon as he saw me he came towards the door and said, "Good evening, policeman; now I am happy. I am ready for the rope." I cautioned him that whatever he said would be used in evidence against him. He then put on his coat and hat, and said, "Let me see my wife." I took him into the bed-room, and his wife said, "Oh, you wicked man, what have you done?" He said, "I have killed all your children. Now you'll be single again, and I shall be hanged." His wife said, "Have you any money?" He said, "Yes," and gave her all he had. He then kissed her and bade her "Good-bye." On the way to the police-station he said, "When I took my money last week I thought of buying a revolver to do it with, but I altered my mind, as I thought it would make too much noise. I had a hard job with the two eldest one -- I soon settled him." With that I said, "I had a hard job with the two oldest one -- I soon settled him." I thought it was too hot. I have had five children in about three years and a half, so I thought I would put a stop to it. At the police-station he said, "I've done it like a man," and when he was charged -- the charge being read over to him by the inspector -- with having murdered the five children, he said, "Quite right, sir."
The inquiry was then adjourned.

---
TRANSCRIPTION NOTES
Source: The Evening News, 11 August 1883
Repository image: sources/images/Media-coverage/The Evening News Aug 11 1883.png
Another version of Ada Hamilton's inquest testimony, broadly consistent with The Times and Daily Telegraph 11 August reports already transcribed, with minor wording variations.
NOTE: This version describes Ada as "the wife of a jeweller" -- consistent with the coroner deposition's identification of William Hamilton as a jeweller.
NOTE: Some garbled/duplicated text in the middle of Cheeseman's evidence ("With that I said, 'I had a hard job...'" appears to be a compositor error repeating part of the previous sentence). Cross-reference against The Times and Daily Telegraph versions for the clean reading.
KEY: This version gives Ada's exact words slightly differently: "Now I'll make your bed once you've got out" -- a more natural, conversational rendering than other accounts.
KEY: This version has Elizabeth's question to William rendered as: "Will you give me all the money you have, my doctor to pay?" -- slightly different phrasing from other accounts but same substance.
